PART ONE


Chapter 1

Happy families are all alike; every unhappy family is unhappy in its ownway.
Everything was in confusion in the Oblonskys’ house. The wife haddiscovered that the husband was carrying on an intrigue with a Frenchgirl, who had been a governess in their family, and she had announced toher husband that she could not go on living in the same house with him.This position of affairs had now lasted three days, and not only thehusband and wife themselves, but all the members of their family andhousehold, were painfully conscious of it. Every person in the housefelt that there was no sense in their living together, and that thestray people brought together by chance in any inn had more in commonwith one another than they, the members of the family and household ofthe Oblonskys. The wife did not leave her own room, the husband had notbeen at home for three days. The children ran wild all over the house;the English governess quarreled with the housekeeper, and wrote to afriend asking her to look out for a new situation for her; the man-cookhad walked off the day before just at dinner time; the kitchen-maid, andthe coachman had given warning.
Three days after the quarrel, Prince Stepan Arkadyevitch Oblonsky—Stiva,as he was called in the fashionable world—woke up at his usual hour,that is, at eight o’clock in the morning, not in his wife’s bedroom, buton the leather-covered sofa in his study. He turned over his stout,well-cared-for person on the springy sofa, as though he would sink intoa long sleep again; he vigorously embraced the pillow on the other sideand buried his face in it; but all at once he jumped up, sat up on thesofa, and opened his eyes.
"Yes, yes, how was it now?" he thought, going over his dream. "Now, howwas it? To be sure! Alabin was giving a dinner at Darmstadt; no, notDarmstadt, but something American. Yes, but then, Darmstadt was inAmerica. Yes, Alabin was giving a dinner on glass tables, and the tablessang, _Il mio tesoro_—not _Il mio tesoro_ though, but something better,and there were some sort of little decanters on the table, and they werewomen, too," he remembered.
Stepan Arkadyevitch’s eyes twinkled gaily, and he pondered with a smile."Yes, it was nice, very nice. There was a great deal more that wasdelightful, only there’s no putting it into words, or even expressing itin one’s thoughts awake." And noticing a gleam of light peeping inbeside one of the serge curtains, he cheerfully dropped his feet overthe edge of the sofa, and felt about with them for his slippers, apresent on his last birthday, worked for him by his wife on gold-coloredmorocco. And, as he had done every day for the last nine years, hestretched out his hand, without getting up, towards the place where hisdressing-gown always hung in his bedroom. And thereupon he suddenlyremembered that he was not sleeping in his wife’s room, but in hisstudy, and why: the smile vanished from his face, he knitted his brows.
"Ah, ah, ah! Oo!..." he muttered, recalling everything that hadhappened. And again every detail of his quarrel with his wife waspresent to his imagination, all the hopelessness of his position, andworst of all, his own fault.
"Yes, she won’t forgive me, and she can’t forgive me. And the most awfulthing about it is that it’s all my fault—all my fault, though I’m not toblame. That’s the point of the whole situation," he reflected. "Oh, oh,oh!" he kept repeating in despair, as he remembered the acutely painfulsensations caused him by this quarrel.
Most unpleasant of all was the first minute when, on coming, happy andgood-humored, from the theater, with a huge pear in his hand for hiswife, he had not found his wife in the drawing-room, to his surprise hadnot found her in the study either, and saw her at last in her bedroomwith the unlucky letter that revealed everything in her hand.
She, his Dolly, forever fussing and worrying over household details, andlimited in her ideas, as he considered, was sitting perfectly still withthe letter in her hand, looking at him with an expression of horror,despair, and indignation.
"What’s this? this?" she asked, pointing to the letter.
And at this recollection, Stepan Arkadyevitch, as is so often the case,was not so much annoyed at the fact itself as at the way in which he hadmet his wife’s words.
There happened to him at that instant what does happen to people whenthey are unexpectedly caught in something very disgraceful. He did notsucceed in adapting his face to the position in which he was placedtowards his wife by the discovery of his fault. Instead of being hurt,denying, defending himself, begging forgiveness, instead of remainingindifferent even—anything would have been better than what he did do—hisface utterly involuntarily (reflex spinal action, reflected StepanArkadyevitch, who was fond of physiology)—utterly involuntarily assumedits habitual, good-humored, and therefore idiotic smile.
This idiotic smile he could not forgive himself. Catching sight of thatsmile, Dolly shuddered as though at physical pain, broke out with hercharacteristic heat into a flood of cruel words, and rushed out of theroom. Since then she had refused to see her husband.
"It’s that idiotic smile that’s to blame for it all," thought StepanArkadyevitch.
"But what’s to be done? What’s to be done?" he said to himself indespair, and found no answer.


Chapter 2

Stepan Arkadyevitch was a truthful man in his relations with himself. Hewas incapable of deceiving himself and persuading himself that herepented of his conduct. He could not at this date repent of the factthat he, a handsome, susceptible man of thirty-four, was not in lovewith his wife, the mother of five living and two dead children, and onlya year younger than himself. All he repented of was that he had notsucceeded better in hiding it from his wife. But he felt all thedifficulty of his position and was sorry for his wife, his children, andhimself. Possibly he might have managed to conceal his sins better fromhis wife if he had anticipated that the knowledge of them would have hadsuch an effect on her. He had never clearly thought out the subject, buthe had vaguely conceived that his wife must long ago have suspected himof being unfaithful to her, and shut her eyes to the fact. He had evensupposed that she, a worn-out woman no longer young or good-looking, andin no way remarkable or interesting, merely a good mother, ought from asense of fairness to take an indulgent view. It had turned out quite theother way.
"Oh, it’s awful! oh dear, oh dear! awful!" Stepan Arkadyevitch keptrepeating to himself, and he could think of nothing to be done. "And howwell things were going up till now! how well we got on! She wascontented and happy in her children; I never interfered with her inanything; I let her manage the children and the house just as she liked.It’s true it’s bad _her_ having been a governess in our house. That’sbad! There’s something common, vulgar, in flirting with one’s governess.But what a governess!" (He vividly recalled the roguish black eyes ofMlle. Roland and her smile.) "But after all, while she was in the house,I kept myself in hand. And the worst of it all is that she’s already ...it seems as if ill-luck would have it so! Oh, oh! But what, what is tobe done?"
There was no solution, but that universal solution which life gives toall questions, even the most complex and insoluble. That answer is: onemust live in the needs of the day—that is, forget oneself. To forgethimself in sleep was impossible now, at least till nighttime; he couldnot go back now to the music sung by the decanter-women; so he mustforget himself in the dream of daily life.
"Then we shall see," Stepan Arkadyevitch said to himself, and getting uphe put on a gray dressing-gown lined with blue silk, tied the tassels ina knot, and, drawing a deep breath of air into his broad, bare chest, hewalked to the window with his usual confident step, turning out his feetthat carried his full frame so easily. He pulled up the blind and rangthe bell loudly. It was at once answered by the appearance of an oldfriend, his valet, Matvey, carrying his clothes, his boots, and atelegram. Matvey was followed by the barber with all the necessaries forshaving.
"Are there any papers from the office?" asked Stepan Arkadyevitch,taking the telegram and seating himself at the looking-glass.
"On the table," replied Matvey, glancing with inquiring sympathy at hismaster; and, after a short pause, he added with a sly smile, "They’vesent from the carriage-jobbers."
Stepan Arkadyevitch made no reply, he merely glanced at Matvey in thelooking-glass. In the glance, in which their eyes met in thelooking-glass, it was clear that they understood one another. StepanArkadyevitch’s eyes asked: "Why do you tell me that? don’t you know?"
Matvey put his hands in his jacket pockets, thrust out one leg, andgazed silently, good-humoredly, with a faint smile, at his master.
"I told them to come on Sunday, and till then not to trouble you orthemselves for nothing," he said. He had obviously prepared the sentencebeforehand.
Stepan Arkadyevitch saw Matvey wanted to make a joke and attractattention to himself. Tearing open the telegram, he read it through,guessing at the words, misspelt as they always are in telegrams, and hisface brightened.
"Matvey, my sister Anna Arkadyevna will be here tomorrow," he said,checking for a minute the sleek, plump hand of the barber, cutting apink path through his long, curly whiskers.
"Thank God!" said Matvey, showing by this response that he, like hismaster, realized the significance of this arrival—that is, that AnnaArkadyevna, the sister he was so fond of, might bring about areconciliation between husband and wife.
"Alone, or with her husband?" inquired Matvey.
Stepan Arkadyevitch could not answer, as the barber was at work on hisupper lip, and he raised one finger. Matvey nodded at the looking-glass.
"Alone. Is the room to be got ready upstairs?"
"Inform Darya Alexandrovna: where she orders."
"Darya Alexandrovna?" Matvey repeated, as though in doubt.
"Yes, inform her. Here, take the telegram; give it to her, and then dowhat she tells you."
"You want to try it on," Matvey understood, but he only said, "Yes sir."
Stepan Arkadyevitch was already washed and combed and ready to bedressed, when Matvey, stepping deliberately in his creaky boots, cameback into the room with the telegram in his hand. The barber had gone.
"Darya Alexandrovna told me to inform you that she is going away. Lethim do—that is you—do as he likes," he said, laughing only with hiseyes, and putting his hands in his pockets, he watched his master withhis head on one side. Stepan Arkadyevitch was silent a minute. Then agood-humored and rather pitiful smile showed itself on his handsomeface.
"Eh, Matvey?" he said, shaking his head.
"It’s all right, sir; she will come round," said Matvey.
"Come round?"
"Yes, sir."
"Do you think so? Who’s there?" asked Stepan Arkadyevitch, hearing therustle of a woman’s dress at the door.
"It’s I," said a firm, pleasant, woman’s voice, and the stern,pockmarked face of Matrona Philimonovna, the nurse, was thrust in at thedoorway.
"Well, what is it, Matrona?" queried Stepan Arkadyevitch, going up toher at the door.
Although Stepan Arkadyevitch was completely in the wrong as regards hiswife, and was conscious of this himself, almost every one in the house(even the nurse, Darya Alexandrovna’s chief ally) was on his side.
"Well, what now?" he asked disconsolately.
"Go to her, sir; own your fault again. Maybe God will aid you. She issuffering so, it’s sad to see her; and besides, everything in the houseis topsy-turvy. You must have pity, sir, on the children. Beg herforgiveness, sir. There’s no help for it! One must take theconsequences..."
"But she won’t see me."
"You do your part. God is merciful; pray to God, sir, pray to God."
"Come, that’ll do, you can go," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, blushingsuddenly. "Well now, do dress me." He turned to Matvey and threw off hisdressing-gown decisively.
Matvey was already holding up the shirt like a horse’s collar, and,blowing off some invisible speck, he slipped it with obvious pleasureover the well-groomed body of his master.


Chapter 3

When he was dressed, Stepan Arkadyevitch sprinkled some scent onhimself, pulled down his shirt-cuffs, distributed into his pockets hiscigarettes, pocketbook, matches, and watch with its double chain andseals, and shaking out his handkerchief, feeling himself clean,fragrant, healthy, and physically at ease, in spite of his unhappiness,he walked with a slight swing on each leg into the dining-room, wherecoffee was already waiting for him, and beside the coffee, letters andpapers from the office.
He read the letters. One was very unpleasant, from a merchant who wasbuying a forest on his wife’s property. To sell this forest wasabsolutely essential; but at present, until he was reconciled with hiswife, the subject could not be discussed. The most unpleasant thing ofall was that his pecuniary interests should in this way enter into thequestion of his reconciliation with his wife. And the idea that he mightbe led on by his interests, that he might seek a reconciliation with hiswife on account of the sale of the forest—that idea hurt him.
When he had finished his letters, Stepan Arkadyevitch moved theoffice-papers close to him, rapidly looked through two pieces ofbusiness, made a few notes with a big pencil, and pushing away thepapers, turned to his coffee. As he sipped his coffee, he opened a stilldamp morning paper, and began reading it.
Stepan Arkadyevitch took in and read a liberal paper, not an extremeone, but one advocating the views held by the majority. And in spite ofthe fact that science, art, and politics had no special interest forhim, he firmly held those views on all these subjects which were held bythe majority and by his paper, and he only changed them when themajority changed them—or, more strictly speaking, he did not changethem, but they imperceptibly changed of themselves within him.
Stepan Arkadyevitch had not chosen his political opinions or his views;these political opinions and views had come to him of themselves, justas he did not choose the shapes of his hat and coat, but simply tookthose that were being worn. And for him, living in a certainsociety—owing to the need, ordinarily developed at years of discretion,for some degree of mental activity—to have views was just asindispensable as to have a hat. If there was a reason for his preferringliberal to conservative views, which were held also by many of hiscircle, it arose not from his considering liberalism more rational, butfrom its being in closer accordance with his manner of life. The liberalparty said that in Russia everything is wrong, and certainly StepanArkadyevitch had many debts and was decidedly short of money. Theliberal party said that marriage is an institution quite out of date,and that it needs reconstruction; and family life certainly affordedStepan Arkadyevitch little gratification, and forced him into lying andhypocrisy, which was so repulsive to his nature. The liberal party said,or rather allowed it to be understood, that religion is only a curb tokeep in check the barbarous classes of the people; and StepanArkadyevitch could not get through even a short service without his legsaching from standing up, and could never make out what was the object ofall the terrible and high-flown language about another world when lifemight be so very amusing in this world. And with all this, StepanArkadyevitch, who liked a joke, was fond of puzzling a plain man bysaying that if he prided himself on his origin, he ought not to stop atRurik and disown the first founder of his family—the monkey. And soLiberalism had become a habit of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s, and he liked hisnewspaper, as he did his cigar after dinner, for the slight fog itdiffused in his brain. He read the leading article, in which it wasmaintained that it was quite senseless in our day to raise an outcrythat radicalism was threatening to swallow up all conservative elements,and that the government ought to take measures to crush therevolutionary hydra; that, on the contrary, "in our opinion the dangerlies not in that fantastic revolutionary hydra, but in the obstinacy oftraditionalism clogging progress," etc., etc. He read another article,too, a financial one, which alluded to Bentham and Mill, and droppedsome innuendoes reflecting on the ministry. With his characteristicquickwittedness he caught the drift of each innuendo, divined whence itcame, at whom and on what ground it was aimed, and that afforded him, asit always did, a certain satisfaction. But today that satisfaction wasembittered by Matrona Philimonovna’s advice and the unsatisfactory stateof the household. He read, too, that Count Beist was rumored to haveleft for Wiesbaden, and that one need have no more gray hair, and of thesale of a light carriage, and of a young person seeking a situation; butthese items of information did not give him, as usual, a quiet, ironicalgratification. Having finished the paper, a second cup of coffee and aroll and butter, he got up, shaking the crumbs of the roll off hiswaistcoat; and, squaring his broad chest, he smiled joyously: notbecause there was anything particularly agreeable in his mind—the joyoussmile was evoked by a good digestion.
But this joyous smile at once recalled everything to him, and he grewthoughtful.
Two childish voices (Stepan Arkadyevitch recognized the voices ofGrisha, his youngest boy, and Tanya, his eldest girl) were heard outsidethe door. They were carrying something, and dropped it.
"I told you not to sit passengers on the roof," said the little girl inEnglish; "there, pick them up!"
"Everything’s in confusion," thought Stepan Arkadyevitch; "there are thechildren running about by themselves." And going to the door, he calledthem. They threw down the box, that represented a train, and came in totheir father.
The little girl, her father’s favorite, ran up boldly, embraced him, andhung laughingly on his neck, enjoying as she always did the smell ofscent that came from his whiskers. At last the little girl kissed hisface, which was flushed from his stooping posture and beaming withtenderness, loosed her hands, and was about to run away again; but herfather held her back.
"How is mamma?" he asked, passing his hand over his daughter’s smooth,soft little neck. "Good morning," he said, smiling to the boy, who hadcome up to greet him. He was conscious that he loved the boy less, andalways tried to be fair; but the boy felt it, and did not respond with asmile to his father’s chilly smile.
"Mamma? She is up," answered the girl.
Stepan Arkadyevitch sighed. "That means that she’s not slept again allnight," he thought.
"Well, is she cheerful?"
The little girl knew that there was a quarrel between her father andmother, and that her mother could not be cheerful, and that her fathermust be aware of this, and that he was pretending when he asked about itso lightly. And she blushed for her father. He at once perceived it, andblushed too.
"I don’t know," she said. "She did not say we must do our lessons, butshe said we were to go for a walk with Miss Hoole to grandmamma’s."
"Well, go, Tanya, my darling. Oh, wait a minute, though," he said, stillholding her and stroking her soft little hand.
He took off the mantelpiece, where he had put it yesterday, a little boxof sweets, and gave her two, picking out her favorites, a chocolate anda fondant.
"For Grisha?" said the little girl, pointing to the chocolate.
"Yes, yes." And still stroking her little shoulder, he kissed her on theroots of her hair and neck, and let her go.
"The carriage is ready," said Matvey; "but there’s some one to see youwith a petition."
"Been here long?" asked Stepan Arkadyevitch.
"Half an hour."
"How many times have I told you to tell me at once?"
"One must let you drink your coffee in peace, at least," said Matvey, inthe affectionately gruff tone with which it was impossible to be angry.
"Well, show the person up at once," said Oblonsky, frowning withvexation.
The petitioner, the widow of a staff captain Kalinin, came with arequest impossible and unreasonable; but Stepan Arkadyevitch, as hegenerally did, made her sit down, heard her to the end attentivelywithout interrupting her, and gave her detailed advice as to how and towhom to apply, and even wrote her, in his large, sprawling, good andlegible hand, a confident and fluent little note to a personage whomight be of use to her. Having got rid of the staff captain’s widow,Stepan Arkadyevitch took his hat and stopped to recollect whether he hadforgotten anything. It appeared that he had forgotten nothing exceptwhat he wanted to forget—his wife.
"Ah, yes!" He bowed his head, and his handsome face assumed a harassedexpression. "To go, or not to go!" he said to himself; and an innervoice told him he must not go, that nothing could come of it butfalsity; that to amend, to set right their relations was impossible,because it was impossible to make her attractive again and able toinspire love, or to make him an old man, not susceptible to love. Exceptdeceit and lying nothing could come of it now; and deceit and lying wereopposed to his nature.
"It must be some time, though: it can’t go on like this," he said,trying to give himself courage. He squared his chest, took out acigarette, took two whiffs at it, flung it into a mother-of-pearlashtray, and with rapid steps walked through the drawing room, andopened the other door into his wife’s bedroom.


Chapter 4

Darya Alexandrovna, in a dressing jacket, and with her now scanty, onceluxuriant and beautiful hair fastened up with hairpins on the nape ofher neck, with a sunken, thin face and large, startled eyes, whichlooked prominent from the thinness of her face, was standing among alitter of all sorts of things scattered all over the room, before anopen bureau, from which she was taking something. Hearing her husband’ssteps, she stopped, looking towards the door, and trying assiduously togive her features a severe and contemptuous expression. She felt she wasafraid of him, and afraid of the coming interview. She was justattempting to do what she had attempted to do ten times already in theselast three days—to sort out the children’s things and her own, so as totake them to her mother’s—and again she could not bring herself to dothis; but now again, as each time before, she kept saying to herself,"that things cannot go on like this, that she must take some step" topunish him, put him to shame, avenge on him some little part at least ofthe suffering he had caused her. She still continued to tell herselfthat she should leave him, but she was conscious that this wasimpossible; it was impossible because she could not get out of the habitof regarding him as her husband and loving him. Besides this, sherealized that if even here in her own house she could hardly manage tolook after her five children properly, they would be still worse offwhere she was going with them all. As it was, even in the course ofthese three days, the youngest was unwell from being given unwholesomesoup, and the others had almost gone without their dinner the daybefore. She was conscious that it was impossible to go away; but,cheating herself, she went on all the same sorting out her things andpretending she was going.
Seeing her husband, she dropped her hands into the drawer of the bureauas though looking for something, and only looked round at him when hehad come quite up to her. But her face, to which she tried to give asevere and resolute expression, betrayed bewilderment and suffering.
"Dolly!" he said in a subdued and timid voice. He bent his head towardshis shoulder and tried to look pitiful and humble, but for all that hewas radiant with freshness and health. In a rapid glance she scanned hisfigure that beamed with health and freshness. "Yes, he is happy andcontent!" she thought; "while I.... And that disgusting good nature,which every one likes him for and praises—I hate that good nature ofhis," she thought. Her mouth stiffened, the muscles of the cheekcontracted on the right side of her pale, nervous face.
"What do you want?" she said in a rapid, deep, unnatural voice.
"Dolly!" he repeated, with a quiver in his voice. "Anna is comingtoday."
"Well, what is that to me? I can’t see her!" she cried.
"But you must, really, Dolly..."
"Go away, go away, go away!" she shrieked, not looking at him, as thoughthis shriek were called up by physical pain.
Stepan Arkadyevitch could be calm when he thought of his wife, he couldhope that she would _come round_, as Matvey expressed it, and couldquietly go on reading his paper and drinking his coffee; but when he sawher tortured, suffering face, heard the tone of her voice, submissive tofate and full of despair, there was a catch in his breath and a lump inhis throat, and his eyes began to shine with tears.
"My God! what have I done? Dolly! For God’s sake!.... You know...." Hecould not go on; there was a sob in his throat.
She shut the bureau with a slam, and glanced at him.
"Dolly, what can I say?.... One thing: forgive... Remember, cannot nineyears of my life atone for an instant...."
She dropped her eyes and listened, expecting what he would say, as itwere beseeching him in some way or other to make her believedifferently.
"—instant of passion?" he said, and would have gone on, but at thatword, as at a pang of physical pain, her lips stiffened again, and againthe muscles of her right cheek worked.
"Go away, go out of the room!" she shrieked still more shrilly, "anddon’t talk to me of your passion and your loathsomeness."
She tried to go out, but tottered, and clung to the back of a chair tosupport herself. His face relaxed, his lips swelled, his eyes wereswimming with tears.
"Dolly!" he said, sobbing now; "for mercy’s sake, think of the children;they are not to blame! I am to blame, and punish me, make me expiate myfault. Anything I can do, I am ready to do anything! I am to blame, nowords can express how much I am to blame! But, Dolly, forgive me!"
She sat down. He listened to her hard, heavy breathing, and he wasunutterably sorry for her. She tried several times to begin to speak,but could not. He waited.
"You remember the children, Stiva, to play with them; but I rememberthem, and know that this means their ruin," she said—obviously one ofthe phrases she had more than once repeated to herself in the course ofthe last few days.
She had called him "Stiva," and he glanced at her with gratitude, andmoved to take her hand, but she drew back from him with aversion.
"I think of the children, and for that reason I would do anything in theworld to save them, but I don’t myself know how to save them. By takingthem away from their father, or by leaving them with a viciousfather—yes, a vicious father.... Tell me, after what ... has happened,can we live together? Is that possible? Tell me, eh, is it possible?"she repeated, raising her voice, "after my husband, the father of mychildren, enters into a love affair with his own children’s governess?"
"But what could I do? what could I do?" he kept saying in a pitifulvoice, not knowing what he was saying, as his head sank lower and lower.
"You are loathsome to me, repulsive!" she shrieked, getting more andmore heated. "Your tears mean nothing! You have never loved me; you haveneither heart nor honorable feeling! You are hateful to me, disgusting,a stranger—yes, a complete stranger!" With pain and wrath she utteredthe word so terrible to herself—_stranger_.
He looked at her, and the fury expressed in her face alarmed and amazedhim. He did not understand how his pity for her exasperated her. She sawin him sympathy for her, but not love. "No, she hates me. She will notforgive me," he thought.
"It is awful! awful!" he said.
At that moment in the next room a child began to cry; probably it hadfallen down. Darya Alexandrovna listened, and her face suddenlysoftened.
She seemed to be pulling herself together for a few seconds, as thoughshe did not know where she was, and what she was doing, and getting uprapidly, she moved towards the door.
"Well, she loves my child," he thought, noticing the change of her faceat the child’s cry, "my child: how can she hate me?"
"Dolly, one word more," he said, following her.
"If you come near me, I will call in the servants, the children! Theymay all know you are a scoundrel! I am going away at once, and you maylive here with your mistress!"
And she went out, slamming the door.
Stepan Arkadyevitch sighed, wiped his face, and with a subdued treadwalked out of the room. "Matvey says she will come round; but how? Idon’t see the least chance of it. Ah, oh, how horrible it is! And howvulgarly she shouted," he said to himself, remembering her shriek andthe words—"scoundrel" and "mistress." "And very likely the maids werelistening! Horribly vulgar! horrible!" Stepan Arkadyevitch stood a fewseconds alone, wiped his face, squared his chest, and walked out of theroom.
It was Friday, and in the dining room the German watchmaker was windingup the clock. Stepan Arkadyevitch remembered his joke about thispunctual, bald watchmaker, "that the German was wound up for a wholelifetime himself, to wind up watches," and he smiled. StepanArkadyevitch was fond of a joke: "And maybe she will come round! That’sa good expression, ‘_come round,_’" he thought. "I must repeat that."
"Matvey!" he shouted. "Arrange everything with Darya in the sitting roomfor Anna Arkadyevna," he said to Matvey when he came in.
"Yes, sir."
Stepan Arkadyevitch put on his fur coat and went out onto the steps.
"You won’t dine at home?" said Matvey, seeing him off.
"That’s as it happens. But here’s for the housekeeping," he said, takingten roubles from his pocketbook. "That’ll be enough."
"Enough or not enough, we must make it do," said Matvey, slamming thecarriage door and stepping back onto the steps.
Darya Alexandrovna meanwhile having pacified the child, and knowing fromthe sound of the carriage that he had gone off, went back again to herbedroom. It was her solitary refuge from the household cares whichcrowded upon her directly she went out from it. Even now, in the shorttime she had been in the nursery, the English governess and MatronaPhilimonovna had succeeded in putting several questions to her, whichdid not admit of delay, and which only she could answer: "What were thechildren to put on for their walk? Should they have any milk? Should nota new cook be sent for?"
"Ah, let me alone, let me alone!" she said, and going back to herbedroom she sat down in the same place as she had sat when talking toher husband, clasping tightly her thin hands with the rings that slippeddown on her bony fingers, and fell to going over in her memory all theconversation. "He has gone! But has he broken it off with her?" shethought. "Can it be he sees her? Why didn’t I ask him! No, no,reconciliation is impossible. Even if we remain in the same house, weare strangers—strangers forever!" She repeated again with specialsignificance the word so dreadful to her. "And how I loved him! my God,how I loved him!.... How I loved him! And now don’t I love him? Don’t Ilove him more than before? The most horrible thing is," she began, butdid not finish her thought, because Matrona Philimonovna put her head inat the door.
"Let us send for my brother," she said; "he can get a dinner anyway, orwe shall have the children getting nothing to eat till six again, likeyesterday."
"Very well, I will come directly and see about it. But did you send forsome new milk?"
And Darya Alexandrovna plunged into the duties of the day, and drownedher grief in them for a time.


Chapter 5

Stepan Arkadyevitch had learned easily at school, thanks to hisexcellent abilities, but he had been idle and mischievous, and thereforewas one of the lowest in his class. But in spite of his habituallydissipated mode of life, his inferior grade in the service, and hiscomparative youth, he occupied the honorable and lucrative position ofpresident of one of the government boards at Moscow. This post he hadreceived through his sister Anna’s husband, Alexey AlexandrovitchKarenin, who held one of the most important positions in the ministry towhose department the Moscow office belonged. But if Karenin had not gothis brother-in-law this berth, then through a hundred otherpersonages—brothers, sisters, cousins, uncles, and aunts—Stiva Oblonskywould have received this post, or some other similar one, together withthe salary of six thousand absolutely needful for him, as his affairs,in spite of his wife’s considerable property, were in an embarrassedcondition.
Half Moscow and Petersburg were friends and relations of StepanArkadyevitch. He was born in the midst of those who had been and are thepowerful ones of this world. One-third of the men in the government, theolder men, had been friends of his father’s, and had known him inpetticoats; another third were his intimate chums, and the remainderwere friendly acquaintances. Consequently the distributors of earthlyblessings in the shape of places, rents, shares, and such, were all hisfriends, and could not overlook one of their own set; and Oblonsky hadno need to make any special exertion to get a lucrative post. He hadonly not to refuse things, not to show jealousy, not to be quarrelsomeor take offense, all of which from his characteristic good nature henever did. It would have struck him as absurd if he had been told thathe would not get a position with the salary he required, especially ashe expected nothing out of the way; he only wanted what the men of hisown age and standing did get, and he was no worse qualified forperforming duties of the kind than any other man.
Stepan Arkadyevitch was not merely liked by all who knew him for hisgood humor, but for his bright disposition, and his unquestionablehonesty. In him, in his handsome, radiant figure, his sparkling eyes,black hair and eyebrows, and the white and red of his face, there wassomething which produced a physical effect of kindliness and good humoron the people who met him. "Aha! Stiva! Oblonsky! Here he is!" wasalmost always said with a smile of delight on meeting him. Even thoughit happened at times that after a conversation with him it seemed thatnothing particularly delightful had happened, the next day, and thenext, every one was just as delighted at meeting him again.
After filling for three years the post of president of one of thegovernment boards at Moscow, Stepan Arkadyevitch had won the respect, aswell as the liking, of his fellow-officials, subordinates, andsuperiors, and all who had had business with him. The principalqualities in Stepan Arkadyevitch which had gained him this universalrespect in the service consisted, in the first place, of his extremeindulgence for others, founded on a consciousness of his ownshortcomings; secondly, of his perfect liberalism—not the liberalism heread of in the papers, but the liberalism that was in his blood, invirtue of which he treated all men perfectly equally and exactly thesame, whatever their fortune or calling might be; and thirdly—the mostimportant point—his complete indifference to the business in which hewas engaged, in consequence of which he was never carried away, andnever made mistakes.
On reaching the offices of the board, Stepan Arkadyevitch, escorted by adeferential porter with a portfolio, went into his little private room,put on his uniform, and went into the boardroom. The clerks and copyistsall rose, greeting him with good-humored deference. Stepan Arkadyevitchmoved quickly, as ever, to his place, shook hands with his colleagues,and sat down. He made a joke or two, and talked just as much as wasconsistent with due decorum, and began work. No one knew better thanStepan Arkadyevitch how to hit on the exact line between freedom,simplicity, and official stiffness necessary for the agreeable conductof business. A secretary, with the good-humored deference common toevery one in Stepan Arkadyevitch’s office, came up with papers, andbegan to speak in the familiar and easy tone which had been introducedby Stepan Arkadyevitch.
"We have succeeded in getting the information from the governmentdepartment of Penza. Here, would you care?...."
"You’ve got them at last?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, laying his fingeron the paper. "Now, gentlemen...."
And the sitting of the board began.
"If they knew," he thought, bending his head with a significant air ashe listened to the report, "what a guilty little boy their president washalf an hour ago." And his eyes were laughing during the reading of thereport. Till two o’clock the sitting would go on without a break, and attwo o’clock there would be an interval and luncheon.
It was not yet two, when the large glass doors of the boardroom suddenlyopened and someone came in.
All the officials sitting on the further side under the portrait of theTsar and the eagle, delighted at any distraction, looked round at thedoor; but the doorkeeper standing at the door at once drove out theintruder, and closed the glass door after him.
When the case had been read through, Stepan Arkadyevitch got up andstretched, and by way of tribute to the liberalism of the times took outa cigarette in the boardroom and went into his private room. Two of themembers of the board, the old veteran in the service, Nikitin, and the_Kammerjunker Grinevitch_, went in with him.
"We shall have time to finish after lunch," said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
"To be sure we shall!" said Nikitin.
"A pretty sharp fellow this Fomin must be," said Grinevitch of one ofthe persons taking part in the case they were examining.
Stepan Arkadyevitch frowned at Grinevitch’s words, giving him thereby tounderstand that it was improper to pass judgment prematurely, and madehim no reply.
"Who was that came in?" he asked the doorkeeper.
"Someone, your excellency, crept in without permission directly my backwas turned. He was asking for you. I told him: when the members comeout, then...."
"Where is he?"
"Maybe he’s gone into the passage, but here he comes anyway. That ishe," said the doorkeeper, pointing to a strongly built, broad-shoulderedman with a curly beard, who, without taking off his sheepskin cap, wasrunning lightly and rapidly up the worn steps of the stone staircase.One of the members going down—a lean official with a portfolio—stood outof his way and looked disapprovingly at the legs of the stranger, thenglanced inquiringly at Oblonsky.
Stepan Arkadyevitch was standing at the top of the stairs. Hisgood-naturedly beaming face above the embroidered collar of his uniformbeamed more than ever when he recognized the man coming up.
"Why, it’s actually you, Levin, at last!" he said with a friendlymocking smile, scanning Levin as he approached. "How is it you havedeigned to look me up in this den?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, and notcontent with shaking hands, he kissed his friend. "Have you been herelong?"
"I have just come, and very much wanted to see you," said Levin, lookingshyly and at the same time angrily and uneasily around.
"Well, let’s go into my room," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, who knew hisfriend’s sensitive and irritable shyness, and, taking his arm, he drewhim along, as though guiding him through dangers.
Stepan Arkadyevitch was on familiar terms with almost all hisacquaintances, and called almost all of them by their Christian names:old men of sixty, boys of twenty, actors, ministers, merchants, andadjutant-generals, so that many of his intimate chums were to be foundat the extreme ends of the social ladder, and would have been very muchsurprised to learn that they had, through the medium of Oblonsky,something in common. He was the familiar friend of everyone with whom hetook a glass of champagne, and he took a glass of champagne witheveryone, and when in consequence he met any of his disreputable chums,as he used in joke to call many of his friends, in the presence of hissubordinates, he well knew how, with his characteristic tact, todiminish the disagreeable impression made on them. Levin was not adisreputable chum, but Oblonsky, with his ready tact, felt that Levinfancied he might not care to show his intimacy with him before hissubordinates, and so he made haste to take him off into his room.
Levin was almost of the same age as Oblonsky; their intimacy did notrest merely on champagne. Levin had been the friend and companion of hisearly youth. They were fond of one another in spite of the difference oftheir characters and tastes, as friends are fond of one another who havebeen together in early youth. But in spite of this, each of them—as isoften the way with men who have selected careers of differentkinds—though in discussion he would even justify the other’s career, inhis heart despised it. It seemed to each of them that the life he ledhimself was the only real life, and the life led by his friend was amere phantasm. Oblonsky could not restrain a slight mocking smile at thesight of Levin. How often he had seen him come up to Moscow from thecountry where he was doing something, but what precisely StepanArkadyevitch could never quite make out, and indeed he took no interestin the matter. Levin arrived in Moscow always excited and in a hurry,rather ill at ease and irritated by his own want of ease, and for themost part with a perfectly new, unexpected view of things. StepanArkadyevitch laughed at this, and liked it. In the same way Levin in hisheart despised the town mode of life of his friend, and his officialduties, which he laughed at, and regarded as trifling. But thedifference was that Oblonsky, as he was doing the same as every one did,laughed complacently and good-humoredly, while Levin laughed withoutcomplacency and sometimes angrily.
"We have long been expecting you," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, going intohis room and letting Levin’s hand go as though to show that here alldanger was over. "I am very, very glad to see you," he went on. "Well,how are you? Eh? When did you come?"
Levin was silent, looking at the unknown faces of Oblonsky’s twocompanions, and especially at the hand of the elegant Grinevitch, whichhad such long white fingers, such long yellow filbert-shaped nails, andsuch huge shining studs on the shirt-cuff, that apparently they absorbedall his attention, and allowed him no freedom of thought. Oblonskynoticed this at once, and smiled.
"Ah, to be sure, let me introduce you," he said. "My colleagues: PhilipIvanitch Nikitin, Mihail Stanislavitch Grinevitch"—and turning toLevin—"a district councilor, a modern district councilman, a gymnast wholifts thirteen stone with one hand, a cattle-breeder and sportsman, andmy friend, Konstantin Dmitrievitch Levin, the brother of SergeyIvanovitch Koznishev."
"Delighted," said the veteran.
"I have the honor of knowing your brother, Sergey Ivanovitch," saidGrinevitch, holding out his slender hand with its long nails.
Levin frowned, shook hands coldly, and at once turned to Oblonsky.Though he had a great respect for his half-brother, an author well knownto all Russia, he could not endure it when people treated him not asKonstantin Levin, but as the brother of the celebrated Koznishev.
"No, I am no longer a district councilor. I have quarreled with themall, and don’t go to the meetings any more," he said, turning toOblonsky.
"You’ve been quick about it!" said Oblonsky with a smile. "But how?why?"
"It’s a long story. I will tell you some time," said Levin, but he begantelling him at once. "Well, to put it shortly, I was convinced thatnothing was really done by the district councils, or ever could be," hebegan, as though some one had just insulted him. "On one side it’s aplaything; they play at being a parliament, and I’m neither young enoughnor old enough to find amusement in playthings; and on the other side"(he stammered) "it’s a means for the coterie of the district to makemoney. Formerly they had wardships, courts of justice, now they have thedistrict council—not in the form of bribes, but in the form of unearnedsalary," he said, as hotly as though someone of those present hadopposed his opinion.
"Aha! You’re in a new phase again, I see—a conservative," said StepanArkadyevitch. "However, we can go into that later."
"Yes, later. But I wanted to see you," said Levin, looking with hatredat Grinevitch’s hand.
Stepan Arkadyevitch gave a scarcely perceptible smile.
"How was it you used to say you would never wear European dress again?"he said, scanning his new suit, obviously cut by a French tailor. "Ah! Isee: a new phase."
Levin suddenly blushed, not as grown men blush, slightly, without beingthemselves aware of it, but as boys blush, feeling that they areridiculous through their shyness, and consequently ashamed of it andblushing still more, almost to the point of tears. And it was so strangeto see this sensible, manly face in such a childish plight, thatOblonsky left off looking at him.
"Oh, where shall we meet? You know I want very much to talk to you,"said Levin.
Oblonsky seemed to ponder.
"I’ll tell you what: let’s go to Gurin’s to lunch, and there we cantalk. I am free till three."
"No," answered Levin, after an instant’s thought, "I have got to go onsomewhere else."
"All right, then, let’s dine together."
"Dine together? But I have nothing very particular, only a few words tosay, and a question I want to ask you, and we can have a talkafterwards."
"Well, say the few words, then, at once, and we’ll gossip after dinner."
"Well, it’s this," said Levin; "but it’s of no importance, though."
His face all at once took an expression of anger from the effort he wasmaking to surmount his shyness.
"What are the Shtcherbatskys doing? Everything as it used to be?" hesaid.
Stepan Arkadyevitch, who had long known that Levin was in love with hissister-in-law, Kitty, gave a hardly perceptible smile, and his eyessparkled merrily.
"You said a few words, but I can’t answer in a few words, because....Excuse me a minute..."
A secretary came in, with respectful familiarity and the modestconsciousness, characteristic of every secretary, of superiority to hischief in the knowledge of their business; he went up to Oblonsky withsome papers, and began, under pretense of asking a question, to explainsome objection. Stepan Arkadyevitch, without hearing him out, laid hishand genially on the secretary’s sleeve.
"No, you do as I told you," he said, softening his words with a smile,and with a brief explanation of his view of the matter he turned awayfrom the papers, and said: "So do it that way, if you please, ZaharNikititch."
The secretary retired in confusion. During the consultation with thesecretary Levin had completely recovered from his embarrassment. He wasstanding with his elbows on the back of a chair, and on his face was alook of ironical attention.
"I don’t understand it, I don’t understand it," he said.
"What don’t you understand?" said Oblonsky, smiling as brightly as ever,and picking up a cigarette. He expected some queer outburst from Levin.
"I don’t understand what you are doing," said Levin, shrugging hisshoulders. "How can you do it seriously?"
"Why not?"
"Why, because there’s nothing in it."
"You think so, but we’re overwhelmed with work."
"On paper. But, there, you’ve a gift for it," added Levin.
"That’s to say, you think there’s a lack of something in me?"
"Perhaps so," said Levin. "But all the same I admire your grandeur, andam proud that I’ve a friend in such a great person. You’ve not answeredmy question, though," he went on, with a desperate effort lookingOblonsky straight in the face.
"Oh, that’s all very well. You wait a bit, and you’ll come to thisyourself. It’s very nice for you to have over six thousand acres in theKarazinsky district, and such muscles, and the freshness of a girl oftwelve; still you’ll be one of us one day. Yes, as to your question,there is no change, but it’s a pity you’ve been away so long."
"Oh, why so?" Levin queried, panic-stricken.
"Oh, nothing," responded Oblonsky. "We’ll talk it over. But what’sbrought you up to town?"
"Oh, we’ll talk about that, too, later on," said Levin, reddening againup to his ears.
"All right. I see," said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "I should ask you to cometo us, you know, but my wife’s not quite the thing. But I tell you what;if you want to see them, they’re sure now to be at the ZoologicalGardens from four to five. Kitty skates. You drive along there, and I’llcome and fetch you, and we’ll go and dine somewhere together."
"Capital. So good-bye till then."
"Now mind, you’ll forget, I know you, or rush off home to the country!"Stepan Arkadyevitch called out laughing.
"No, truly!"
And Levin went out of the room, only when he was in the doorwayremembering that he had forgotten to take leave of Oblonsky’scolleagues.
"That gentleman must be a man of great energy," said Grinevitch, whenLevin had gone away.
"Yes, my dear boy," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, nodding his head, "he’s alucky fellow! Over six thousand acres in the Karazinsky district;everything before him; and what youth and vigor! Not like some of us."
"You have a great deal to complain of, haven’t you, StepanArkadyevitch?"
"Ah, yes, I’m in a poor way, a bad way," said Stepan Arkadyevitch with aheavy sigh.


Chapter 6

When Oblonsky asked Levin what had brought him to town, Levin blushed,and was furious with himself for blushing, because he could not answer,"I have come to make your sister-in-law an offer," though that wasprecisely what he had come for.
The families of the Levins and the Shtcherbatskys were old, noble Moscowfamilies, and had always been on intimate and friendly terms. Thisintimacy had grown still closer during Levin’s student days. He had bothprepared for the university with the young Prince Shtcherbatsky, thebrother of Kitty and Dolly, and had entered at the same time with him.In those days Levin used often to be in the Shtcherbatskys’ house, andhe was in love with the Shtcherbatsky household. Strange as it mayappear, it was with the household, the family, that Konstantin Levin wasin love, especially with the feminine half of the household. Levin didnot remember his own mother, and his only sister was older than he was,so that it was in the Shtcherbatskys’ house that he saw for the firsttime that inner life of an old, noble, cultivated, and honorable familyof which he had been deprived by the death of his father and mother. Allthe members of that family, especially the feminine half, were picturedby him, as it were, wrapped about with a mysterious poetical veil, andhe not only perceived no defects whatever in them, but under thepoetical veil that shrouded them he assumed the existence of theloftiest sentiments and every possible perfection. Why it was the threeyoung ladies had one day to speak French, and the next English; why itwas that at certain hours they played by turns on the piano, the soundsof which were audible in their brother’s room above, where the studentsused to work; why they were visited by those professors of Frenchliterature, of music, of drawing, of dancing; why at certain hours allthe three young ladies, with Mademoiselle Linon, drove in the coach tothe Tversky boulevard, dressed in their satin cloaks, Dolly in a longone, Natalia in a half-long one, and Kitty in one so short that hershapely legs in tightly-drawn red stockings were visible to allbeholders; why it was they had to walk about the Tversky boulevardescorted by a footman with a gold cockade in his hat—all this and muchmore that was done in their mysterious world he did not understand, buthe was sure that everything that was done there was very good, and hewas in love precisely with the mystery of the proceedings.
In his student days he had all but been in love with the eldest, Dolly,but she was soon married to Oblonsky. Then he began being in love withthe second. He felt, as it were, that he had to be in love with one ofthe sisters, only he could not quite make out which. But Natalia, too,had hardly made her appearance in the world when she married thediplomat Lvov. Kitty was still a child when Levin left the university.Young Shtcherbatsky went into the navy, was drowned in the Baltic, andLevin’s relations with the Shtcherbatskys, in spite of his friendshipwith Oblonsky, became less intimate. But when early in the winter ofthis year Levin came to Moscow, after a year in the country, and saw theShtcherbatskys, he realized which of the three sisters he was indeeddestined to love.
One would have thought that nothing could be simpler than for him, a manof good family, rather rich than poor, and thirty-two years old, to makethe young Princess Shtcherbatskaya an offer of marriage; in alllikelihood he would at once have been looked upon as a good match. ButLevin was in love, and so it seemed to him that Kitty was so perfect inevery respect that she was a creature far above everything earthly; andthat he was a creature so low and so earthly that it could not even beconceived that other people and she herself could regard him as worthyof her.
After spending two months in Moscow in a state of enchantment, seeingKitty almost every day in society, into which he went so as to meet her,he abruptly decided that it could not be, and went back to the country.
Levin’s conviction that it could not be was founded on the idea that inthe eyes of her family he was a disadvantageous and worthless match forthe charming Kitty, and that Kitty herself could not love him. In herfamily’s eyes he had no ordinary, definite career and position insociety, while his contemporaries by this time, when he was thirty-two,were already, one a colonel, and another a professor, another directorof a bank and railways, or president of a board like Oblonsky. But he(he knew very well how he must appear to others) was a countrygentleman, occupied in breeding cattle, shooting game, and buildingbarns; in other words, a fellow of no ability, who had not turned outwell, and who was doing just what, according to the ideas of the world,is done by people fit for nothing else.
The mysterious, enchanting Kitty herself could not love such an uglyperson as he conceived himself to be, and, above all, such an ordinary,in no way striking person. Moreover, his attitude to Kitty in thepast—the attitude of a grown-up person to a child, arising from hisfriendship with her brother—seemed to him yet another obstacle to love.An ugly, good-natured man, as he considered himself, might, he supposed,be liked as a friend; but to be loved with such a love as that withwhich he loved Kitty, one would need to be a handsome and, still more, adistinguished man.
He had heard that women often did care for ugly and ordinary men, but hedid not believe it, for he judged by himself, and he could not himselfhave loved any but beautiful, mysterious, and exceptional women.
But after spending two months alone in the country, he was convincedthat this was not one of those passions of which he had had experiencein his early youth; that this feeling gave him not an instant’s rest;that he could not live without deciding the question, would she or wouldshe not be his wife, and that his despair had arisen only from his ownimaginings, that he had no sort of proof that he would be rejected. Andhe had now come to Moscow with a firm determination to make an offer,and get married if he were accepted. Or ... he could not conceive whatwould become of him if he were rejected.


Chapter 7

On arriving in Moscow by a morning train, Levin had put up at the houseof his elder half-brother, Koznishev. After changing his clothes he wentdown to his brother’s study, intending to talk to him at once about theobject of his visit, and to ask his advice; but his brother was notalone. With him there was a well-known professor of philosophy, who hadcome from Harkov expressly to clear up a difference that had arisenbetween them on a very important philosophical question. The professorwas carrying on a hot crusade against materialists. Sergey Koznishev hadbeen following this crusade with interest, and after reading theprofessor’s last article, he had written him a letter stating hisobjections. He accused the professor of making too great concessions tothe materialists. And the professor had promptly appeared to argue thematter out. The point in discussion was the question then in vogue: Isthere a line to be drawn between psychological and physiologicalphenomena in man? and if so, where?
Sergey Ivanovitch met his brother with the smile of chilly friendlinesshe always had for everyone, and introducing him to the professor, wenton with the conversation.
A little man in spectacles, with a narrow forehead, tore himself fromthe discussion for an instant to greet Levin, and then went on talkingwithout paying any further attention to him. Levin sat down to wait tillthe professor should go, but he soon began to get interested in thesubject under discussion.
Levin had come across the magazine articles about which they weredisputing, and had read them, interested in them as a development of thefirst principles of science, familiar to him as a natural sciencestudent at the university. But he had never connected these scientificdeductions as to the origin of man as an animal, as to reflex action,biology, and sociology, with those questions as to the meaning of lifeand death to himself, which had of late been more and more often in hismind.
As he listened to his brother’s argument with the professor, he noticedthat they connected these scientific questions with those spiritualproblems, that at times they almost touched on the latter; but everytime they were close upon what seemed to him the chief point, theypromptly beat a hasty retreat, and plunged again into a sea of subtledistinctions, reservations, quotations, allusions, and appeals toauthorities, and it was with difficulty that he understood what theywere talking about.
"I cannot admit it," said Sergey Ivanovitch, with his habitualclearness, precision of expression, and elegance of phrase. "I cannot inany case agree with Keiss that my whole conception of the external worldhas been derived from perceptions. The most fundamental idea, the ideaof existence, has not been received by me through sensation; indeed,there is no special sense-organ for the transmission of such an idea."
"Yes, but they—Wurt, and Knaust, and Pripasov—would answer that yourconsciousness of existence is derived from the conjunction of all yoursensations, that that consciousness of existence is the result of yoursensations. Wurt, indeed, says plainly that, assuming there are nosensations, it follows that there is no idea of existence."
"I maintain the contrary," began Sergey Ivanovitch.
But here it seemed to Levin that just as they were close upon the realpoint of the matter, they were again retreating, and he made up his mindto put a question to the professor.
"According to that, if my senses are annihilated, if my body is dead, Ican have no existence of any sort?" he queried.
The professor, in annoyance, and, as it were, mental suffering at theinterruption, looked round at the strange inquirer, more like a bargemanthan a philosopher, and turned his eyes upon Sergey Ivanovitch, asthough to ask: What’s one to say to him? But Sergey Ivanovitch, who hadbeen talking with far less heat and one-sidedness than the professor,and who had sufficient breadth of mind to answer the professor, and atthe same time to comprehend the simple and natural point of view fromwhich the question was put, smiled and said:
"That question we have no right to answer as yet."
"We have not the requisite data," chimed in the professor, and he wentback to his argument. "No," he said; "I would point out the fact thatif, as Pripasov directly asserts, perception is based on sensation, thenwe are bound to distinguish sharply between these two conceptions."
Levin listened no more, and simply waited for the professor to go.


Chapter 8

When the professor had gone, Sergey Ivanovitch turned to his brother.
"Delighted that you’ve come. For some time, is it? How’s your farminggetting on?"
Levin knew that his elder brother took little interest in farming, andonly put the question in deference to him, and so he only told him aboutthe sale of his wheat and money matters.
Levin had meant to tell his brother of his determination to get married,and to ask his advice; he had indeed firmly resolved to do so. But afterseeing his brother, listening to his conversation with the professor,hearing afterwards the unconsciously patronizing tone in which hisbrother questioned him about agricultural matters (their mother’sproperty had not been divided, and Levin took charge of both theirshares), Levin felt that he could not for some reason begin to talk tohim of his intention of marrying. He felt that his brother would notlook at it as he would have wished him to.
"Well, how is your district council doing?" asked Sergey Ivanovitch, whowas greatly interested in these local boards and attached greatimportance to them.
"I really don’t know."
"What! Why, surely you’re a member of the board?"
"No, I’m not a member now; I’ve resigned," answered Levin, "and I nolonger attend the meetings."
"What a pity!" commented Sergey Ivanovitch, frowning.
Levin in self-defense began to describe what took place in the meetingsin his district.
"That’s how it always is!" Sergey Ivanovitch interrupted him. "WeRussians are always like that. Perhaps it’s our strong point, really,the faculty of seeing our own shortcomings; but we overdo it, we comfortourselves with irony which we always have on the tip of our tongues. AllI say is, give such rights as our local self-government to any otherEuropean people—why, the Germans or the English would have worked theirway to freedom from them, while we simply turn them into ridicule."
"But how can it be helped?" said Levin penitently. "It was my lasteffort. And I did try with all my soul. I can’t. I’m no good at it."
"It’s not that you’re no good at it," said Sergey Ivanovitch; "it isthat you don’t look at it as you should."
"Perhaps not," Levin answered dejectedly.
"Oh! do you know brother Nikolay’s turned up again?"
This brother Nikolay was the elder brother of Konstantin Levin, andhalf-brother of Sergey Ivanovitch; a man utterly ruined, who haddissipated the greater part of his fortune, was living in the strangestand lowest company, and had quarreled with his brothers.
"What did you say?" Levin cried with horror. "How do you know?"
"Prokofy saw him in the street."
"Here in Moscow? Where is he? Do you know?" Levin got up from his chair,as though on the point of starting off at once.
"I am sorry I told you," said Sergey Ivanovitch, shaking his head at hisyounger brother’s excitement. "I sent to find out where he is living,and sent him his IOU to Trubin, which I paid. This is the answer he sentme."
And Sergey Ivanovitch took a note from under a paper-weight and handedit to his brother.
Levin read in the queer, familiar handwriting: "I humbly beg you toleave me in peace. That’s the only favor I ask of my graciousbrothers.—Nikolay Levin."
Levin read it, and without raising his head stood with the note in hishands opposite Sergey Ivanovitch.
There was a struggle in his heart between the desire to forget hisunhappy brother for the time, and the consciousness that it would bebase to do so.
"He obviously wants to offend me," pursued Sergey Ivanovitch; "but hecannot offend me, and I should have wished with all my heart to assisthim, but I know it’s impossible to do that."
"Yes, yes," repeated Levin. "I understand and appreciate your attitudeto him; but I shall go and see him."
"If you want to, do; but I shouldn’t advise it," said Sergey Ivanovitch."As regards myself, I have no fear of your doing so; he will not makeyou quarrel with me; but for your own sake, I should say you would dobetter not to go. You can’t do him any good; still, do as you please."
"Very likely I can’t do any good, but I feel—especially at such amoment—but that’s another thing—I feel I could not be at peace."
"Well, that I don’t understand," said Sergey Ivanovitch. "One thing I dounderstand," he added; "it’s a lesson in humility. I have come to lookvery differently and more charitably on what is called infamous sincebrother Nikolay has become what he is ... you know what he did..."
"Oh, it’s awful, awful!" repeated Levin.
After obtaining his brother’s address from Sergey Ivanovitch’s footman,Levin was on the point of setting off at once to see him, but on secondthought he decided to put off his visit till the evening. The firstthing to do to set his heart at rest was to accomplish what he had cometo Moscow for. From his brother’s Levin went to Oblonsky’s office, andon getting news of the Shtcherbatskys from him, he drove to the placewhere he had been told he might find Kitty.


Chapter 9

At four o’clock, conscious of his throbbing heart, Levin stepped out ofa hired sledge at the Zoological Gardens, and turned along the path tothe frozen mounds and the skating ground, knowing that he wouldcertainly find her there, as he had seen the Shtcherbatskys’ carriage atthe entrance.
It was a bright, frosty day. Rows of carriages, sledges, drivers, andpolicemen were standing in the approach. Crowds of well-dressed people,with hats bright in the sun, swarmed about the entrance and along thewell-swept little paths between the little houses adorned with carvingin the Russian style. The old curly birches of the gardens, all theirtwigs laden with snow, looked as though freshly decked in sacredvestments.
He walked along the path towards the skating-ground, and kept saying tohimself—"You mustn’t be excited, you must be calm. What’s the matterwith you? What do you want? Be quiet, stupid," he conjured his heart.And the more he tried to compose himself, the more breathless he foundhimself. An acquaintance met him and called him by his name, but Levindid not even recognize him. He went towards the mounds, whence came theclank of the chains of sledges as they slipped down or were dragged up,the rumble of the sliding sledges, and the sounds of merry voices. Hewalked on a few steps, and the skating-ground lay open before his eyes,and at once, amidst all the skaters, he knew her.
He knew she was there by the rapture and the terror that seized on hisheart. She was standing talking to a lady at the opposite end of theground. There was apparently nothing striking either in her dress or herattitude. But for Levin she was as easy to find in that crowd as a roseamong nettles. Everything was made bright by her. She was the smile thatshed light on all round her. "Is it possible I can go over there on theice, go up to her?" he thought. The place where she stood seemed to hima holy shrine, unapproachable, and there was one moment when he wasalmost retreating, so overwhelmed was he with terror. He had to make aneffort to master himself, and to remind himself that people of all sortswere moving about her, and that he too might come there to skate. Hewalked down, for a long while avoiding looking at her as at the sun, butseeing her, as one does the sun, without looking.
On that day of the week and at that time of day people of one set, allacquainted with one another, used to meet on the ice. There were crackskaters there, showing off their skill, and learners clinging to chairswith timid, awkward movements, boys, and elderly people skating withhygienic motives. They seemed to Levin an elect band of blissful beingsbecause they were here, near her. All the skaters, it seemed, withperfect self-possession, skated towards her, skated by her, even spoketo her, and were happy, quite apart from her, enjoying the capital iceand the fine weather.
Nikolay Shtcherbatsky, Kitty’s cousin, in a short jacket and tighttrousers, was sitting on a garden seat with his skates on. Seeing Levin,he shouted to him:
"Ah, the first skater in Russia! Been here long? First-rate ice—do putyour skates on."
"I haven’t got my skates," Levin answered, marveling at this boldnessand ease in her presence, and not for one second losing sight of her,though he did not look at her. He felt as though the sun were comingnear him. She was in a corner, and turning out her slender feet in theirhigh boots with obvious timidity, she skated towards him. A boy inRussian dress, desperately waving his arms and bowed down to the ground,overtook her. She skated a little uncertainly; taking her hands out ofthe little muff that hung on a cord, she held them ready for emergency,and looking towards Levin, whom she had recognized, she smiled at him,and at her own fears. When she had got round the turn, she gave herselfa push off with one foot, and skated straight up to Shtcherbatsky.Clutching at his arm, she nodded smiling to Levin. She was more splendidthan he had imagined her.
When he thought of her, he could call up a vivid picture of her tohimself, especially the charm of that little fair head, so freely set onthe shapely girlish shoulders, and so full of childish brightness andgood humor. The childishness of her expression, together with thedelicate beauty of her figure, made up her special charm, and that hefully realized. But what always struck him in her as something unlookedfor, was the expression of her eyes, soft, serene, and truthful, andabove all, her smile, which always transported Levin to an enchantedworld, where he felt himself softened and tender, as he rememberedhimself in some days of his early childhood.
"Have you been here long?" she said, giving him her hand. "Thank you,"she added, as he picked up the handkerchief that had fallen out of hermuff.
"I? I’ve not long ... yesterday ... I mean today ... I arrived,"answered Levin, in his emotion not at once understanding her question."I was meaning to come and see you," he said; and then, recollectingwith what intention he was trying to see her, he was promptly overcomewith confusion and blushed.
"I didn’t know you could skate, and skate so well."
She looked at him earnestly, as though wishing to make out the cause ofhis confusion.
"Your praise is worth having. The tradition is kept up here that you arethe best of skaters," she said, with her little black-gloved handbrushing a grain of hoarfrost off her muff.
"Yes, I used once to skate with passion; I wanted to reach perfection."
"You do everything with passion, I think," she said smiling. "I shouldso like to see how you skate. Put on skates, and let us skate together."
"Skate together! Can that be possible?" thought Levin, gazing at her.
"I’ll put them on directly," he said.
And he went off to get skates.
"It’s a long while since we’ve seen you here, sir," said the attendant,supporting his foot, and screwing on the heel of the skate. "Except you,there’s none of the gentlemen first-rate skaters. Will that be allright?" said he, tightening the strap.
"Oh, yes, yes; make haste, please," answered Levin, with difficultyrestraining the smile of rapture which would overspread his face. "Yes,"he thought, "this now is life, this is happiness! _Together,_ she said;_let us skate together!_ Speak to her now? But that’s just why I’mafraid to speak—because I’m happy now, happy in hope, anyway.... Andthen?.... But I must! I must! I must! Away with weakness!"
Levin rose to his feet, took off his overcoat, and scurrying over therough ice round the hut, came out on the smooth ice and skated withouteffort, as it were, by simple exercise of will, increasing andslackening speed and turning his course. He approached with timidity,but again her smile reassured him.
She gave him her hand, and they set off side by side, going faster andfaster, and the more rapidly they moved the more tightly she grasped hishand.
"With you I should soon learn; I somehow feel confidence in you," shesaid to him.
"And I have confidence in myself when you are leaning on me," he said,but was at once panic-stricken at what he had said, and blushed. Andindeed, no sooner had he uttered these words, when all at once, like thesun going behind a cloud, her face lost all its friendliness, and Levindetected the familiar change in her expression that denoted the workingof thought; a crease showed on her smooth brow.
"Is there anything troubling you?—though I’ve no right to ask such aquestion," he added hurriedly.
"Oh, why so?.... No, I have nothing to trouble me," she respondedcoldly; and she added immediately: "You haven’t seen Mlle. Linon, haveyou?"
"Not yet."
"Go and speak to her, she likes you so much."
"What’s wrong? I have offended her. Lord help me!" thought Levin, and heflew towards the old Frenchwoman with the gray ringlets, who was sittingon a bench. Smiling and showing her false teeth, she greeted him as anold friend.
"Yes, you see we’re growing up," she said to him, glancing towardsKitty, "and growing old. _Tiny bear_ has grown big now!" pursued theFrenchwoman, laughing, and she reminded him of his joke about the threeyoung ladies whom he had compared to the three bears in the Englishnursery tale. "Do you remember that’s what you used to call them?"
He remembered absolutely nothing, but she had been laughing at the jokefor ten years now, and was fond of it.
"Now, go and skate, go and skate. Our Kitty has learned to skate nicely,hasn’t she?"
When Levin darted up to Kitty her face was no longer stern; her eyeslooked at him with the same sincerity and friendliness, but Levinfancied that in her friendliness there was a certain note of deliberatecomposure. And he felt depressed. After talking a little of her oldgoverness and her peculiarities, she questioned him about his life.
"Surely you must be dull in the country in the winter, aren’t you?" shesaid.
"No, I’m not dull, I am very busy," he said, feeling that she washolding him in check by her composed tone, which he would not have theforce to break through, just as it had been at the beginning of thewinter.
"Are you going to stay in town long?" Kitty questioned him.
"I don’t know," he answered, not thinking of what he was saying. Thethought that if he were held in check by her tone of quiet friendlinesshe would end by going back again without deciding anything came into hismind, and he resolved to make a struggle against it.
"How is it you don’t know?"
"I don’t know. It depends upon you," he said, and was immediatelyhorror-stricken at his own words.
Whether it was that she had heard his words, or that she did not want tohear them, she made a sort of stumble, twice struck out, and hurriedlyskated away from him. She skated up to Mlle. Linon, said something toher, and went towards the pavilion where the ladies took off theirskates.
"My God! what have I done! Merciful God! help me, guide me," said Levin,praying inwardly, and at the same time, feeling a need of violentexercise, he skated about describing inner and outer circles.
At that moment one of the young men, the best of the skaters of the day,came out of the coffee-house in his skates, with a cigarette in hismouth. Taking a run, he dashed down the steps in his skates, crashingand bounding up and down. He flew down, and without even changing theposition of his hands, skated away over the ice.
"Ah, that’s a new trick!" said Levin, and he promptly ran up to the topto do this new trick.
"Don’t break your neck! it needs practice!" Nikolay Shtcherbatskyshouted after him.
Levin went to the steps, took a run from above as best he could, anddashed down, preserving his balance in this unwonted movement with hishands. On the last step he stumbled, but barely touching the ice withhis hand, with a violent effort recovered himself, and skated off,laughing.
"How splendid, how nice he is!" Kitty was thinking at that time, as shecame out of the pavilion with Mlle. Linon, and looked towards him with asmile of quiet affection, as though he were a favorite brother. "And canit be my fault, can I have done anything wrong? They talk of flirtation.I know it’s not he that I love; but still I am happy with him, and he’sso jolly. Only, why did he say that?..." she mused.
Catching sight of Kitty going away, and her mother meeting her at thesteps, Levin, flushed from his rapid exercise, stood still and pondereda minute. He took off his skates, and overtook the mother and daughterat the entrance of the gardens.
"Delighted to see you," said Princess Shtcherbatskaya. "On Thursdays weare home, as always."
"Today, then?"
"We shall be pleased to see you," the princess said stiffly.
This stiffness hurt Kitty, and she could not resist the desire to smoothover her mother’s coldness. She turned her head, and with a smile said:
"Good-bye till this evening."
At that moment Stepan Arkadyevitch, his hat cocked on one side, withbeaming face and eyes, strode into the garden like a conquering hero.But as he approached his mother-in-law, he responded in a mournful andcrestfallen tone to her inquiries about Dolly’s health. After a littlesubdued and dejected conversation with his mother-in-law, he threw outhis chest again, and put his arm in Levin’s.
"Well, shall we set off?" he asked. "I’ve been thinking about you allthis time, and I’m very, very glad you’ve come," he said, looking him inthe face with a significant air.
"Yes, come along," answered Levin in ecstasy, hearing unceasingly thesound of that voice saying, "Good-bye till this evening," and seeing thesmile with which it was said.
"To the England or the Hermitage?"
"I don’t mind which."
"All right, then, the England," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, selecting thatrestaurant because he owed more there than at the Hermitage, andconsequently considered it mean to avoid it. "Have you got a sledge?That’s first-rate, for I sent my carriage home."
The friends hardly spoke all the way. Levin was wondering what thatchange in Kitty’s expression had meant, and alternately assuring himselfthat there was hope, and falling into despair, seeing clearly that hishopes were insane, and yet all the while he felt himself quite anotherman, utterly unlike what he had been before her smile and those words,"Good-bye till this evening."
Stepan Arkadyevitch was absorbed during the drive in composing the menuof the dinner.
"You like turbot, don’t you?" he said to Levin as they were arriving.
"Eh?" responded Levin. "Turbot? Yes, I’m _awfully_ fond of turbot."


Chapter 10

When Levin went into the restaurant with Oblonsky, he could not helpnoticing a certain peculiarity of expression, as it were, a restrainedradiance, about the face and whole figure of Stepan Arkadyevitch.Oblonsky took off his overcoat, and with his hat over one ear walkedinto the dining room, giving directions to the Tatar waiters, who wereclustered about him in evening coats, bearing napkins. Bowing to rightand left to the people he met, and here as everywhere joyously greetingacquaintances, he went up to the sideboard for a preliminary appetizerof fish and vodka, and said to the painted Frenchwoman decked inribbons, lace, and ringlets, behind the counter, something so amusingthat even that Frenchwoman was moved to genuine laughter. Levin for hispart refrained from taking any vodka simply because he felt such aloathing of that Frenchwoman, all made up, it seemed, of false hair,_poudre de riz,_ and _vinaigre de toilette_. He made haste to move awayfrom her, as from a dirty place. His whole soul was filled with memoriesof Kitty, and there was a smile of triumph and happiness shining in hiseyes.
"This way, your excellency, please. Your excellency won’t be disturbedhere," said a particularly pertinacious, white-headed old Tatar withimmense hips and coat-tails gaping widely behind. "Walk in, yourexcellency," he said to Levin; by way of showing his respect to StepanArkadyevitch, being attentive to his guest as well.
Instantly flinging a fresh cloth over the round table under the bronzechandelier, though it already had a table cloth on it, he pushed upvelvet chairs, and came to a standstill before Stepan Arkadyevitch witha napkin and a bill of fare in his hands, awaiting his commands.
"If you prefer it, your excellency, a private room will be freedirectly; Prince Golistin with a lady. Fresh oysters have come in."
"Ah! oysters."
Stepan Arkadyevitch became thoughtful.
"How if we were to change our program, Levin?" he said, keeping hisfinger on the bill of fare. And his face expressed serious hesitation."Are the oysters good? Mind now."
"They’re Flensburg, your excellency. We’ve no Ostend."
"Flensburg will do, but are they fresh?"
"Only arrived yesterday."
"Well, then, how if we were to begin with oysters, and so change thewhole program? Eh?"
"It’s all the same to me. I should like cabbage soup and porridge betterthan anything; but of course there’s nothing like that here."
"_Porridge à la Russe,_ your honor would like?" said the Tatar, bendingdown to Levin, like a nurse speaking to a child.
"No, joking apart, whatever you choose is sure to be good. I’ve beenskating, and I’m hungry. And don’t imagine," he added, detecting a lookof dissatisfaction on Oblonsky’s face, "that I shan’t appreciate yourchoice. I am fond of good things."
"I should hope so! After all, it’s one of the pleasures of life," saidStepan Arkadyevitch. "Well, then, my friend, you give us two—or bettersay three—dozen oysters, clear soup with vegetables...."
"_Printanière,_" prompted the Tatar. But Stepan Arkadyevitch apparentlydid not care to allow him the satisfaction of giving the French names ofthe dishes.
"With vegetables in it, you know. Then turbot with thick sauce, then ...roast beef; and mind it’s good. Yes, and capons, perhaps, and thensweets."
The Tatar, recollecting that it was Stepan Arkadyevitch’s way not tocall the dishes by the names in the French bill of fare, did not repeatthem after him, but could not resist rehearsing the whole menu tohimself according to the bill:—"_Soupe printanière, turbot, sauceBeaumarchais, poulard à l’estragon, macédoine de fruits_ ... etc.," andthen instantly, as though worked by springs, laying down one bound billof fare, he took up another, the list of wines, and submitted it toStepan Arkadyevitch.
"What shall we drink?"
"What you like, only not too much. Champagne," said Levin.
"What! to start with? You’re right though, I dare say. Do you like thewhite seal?"
"_Cachet blanc,_" prompted the Tatar.
"Very well, then, give us that brand with the oysters, and then we’llsee."
"Yes, sir. And what table wine?"
"You can give us Nuits. Oh, no, better the classic Chablis."
"Yes, sir. And _your_ cheese, your excellency?"
"Oh, yes, Parmesan. Or would you like another?"
"No, it’s all the same to me," said Levin, unable to suppress a smile.
And the Tatar ran off with flying coat-tails, and in five minutes dartedin with a dish of opened oysters on mother-of-pearl shells, and a bottlebetween his fingers.
Stepan Arkadyevitch crushed the starchy napkin, tucked it into hiswaistcoat, and settling his arms comfortably, started on the oysters.
"Not bad," he said, stripping the oysters from the pearly shell with asilver fork, and swallowing them one after another. "Not bad," herepeated, turning his dewy, brilliant eyes from Levin to the Tatar.
Levin ate the oysters indeed, though white bread and cheese would havepleased him better. But he was admiring Oblonsky. Even the Tatar,uncorking the bottle and pouring the sparkling wine into the delicateglasses, glanced at Stepan Arkadyevitch, and settled his white cravatwith a perceptible smile of satisfaction.
"You don’t care much for oysters, do you?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch,emptying his wine glass, "or you’re worried about something. Eh?"
He wanted Levin to be in good spirits. But it was not that Levin was notin good spirits; he was ill at ease. With what he had in his soul, hefelt sore and uncomfortable in the restaurant, in the midst of privaterooms where men were dining with ladies, in all this fuss and bustle;the surroundings of bronzes, looking glasses, gas, and waiters—all of itwas offensive to him. He was afraid of sullying what his soul wasbrimful of.
"I? Yes, I am; but besides, all this bothers me," he said. "You can’tconceive how queer it all seems to a country person like me, as queer asthat gentleman’s nails I saw at your place..."
"Yes, I saw how much interested you were in poor Grinevitch’s nails,"said Stepan Arkadyevitch, laughing.
"It’s too much for me," responded Levin. "Do try, now, and put yourselfin my place, take the point of view of a country person. We in thecountry try to bring our hands into such a state as will be mostconvenient for working with. So we cut our nails; sometimes we turn upour sleeves. And here people purposely let their nails grow as long asthey will, and link on small saucers by way of studs, so that they cando nothing with their hands."
Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled gaily.
"Oh, yes, that’s just a sign that he has no need to do coarse work. Hiswork is with the mind..."
"Maybe. But still it’s queer to me, just as at this moment it seemsqueer to me that we country folks try to get our meals over as soon aswe can, so as to be ready for our work, while here are we trying to dragout our meal as long as possible, and with that object eatingoysters..."
"Why, of course," objected Stepan Arkadyevitch. "But that’s just the aimof civilization—to make everything a source of enjoyment."
"Well, if that’s its aim, I’d rather be a savage."
"And so you are a savage. All you Levins are savages."
Levin sighed. He remembered his brother Nikolay, and felt ashamed andsore, and he scowled; but Oblonsky began speaking of a subject which atonce drew his attention.
"Oh, I say, are you going tonight to our people, the Shtcherbatskys’, Imean?" he said, his eyes sparkling significantly as he pushed away theempty rough shells, and drew the cheese towards him.
"Yes, I shall certainly go," replied Levin; "though I fancied theprincess was not very warm in her invitation."
"What nonsense! That’s her manner.... Come, boy, the soup!.... That’sher manner—_grande dame,_" said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "I’m coming, too,but I have to go to the Countess Bonina’s rehearsal. Come, isn’t it truethat you’re a savage? How do you explain the sudden way in which youvanished from Moscow? The Shtcherbatskys were continually asking meabout you, as though I ought to know. The only thing I know is that youalways do what no one else does."
"Yes," said Levin, slowly and with emotion, "you’re right. I am asavage. Only, my savageness is not in having gone away, but in comingnow. Now I have come..."
"Oh, what a lucky fellow you are!" broke in Stepan Arkadyevitch, lookinginto Levin’s eyes.
"Why?"
    "I know a gallant steed by tokens sure,    And by his eyes I know a youth in love,"
declaimed Stepan Arkadyevitch. "Everything is before you."
"Why, is it over for you already?"
"No; not over exactly, but the future is yours, and the present is mine,and the present—well, it’s not all that it might be."
"How so?"
"Oh, things go wrong. But I don’t want to talk of myself, and besides Ican’t explain it all," said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "Well, why have youcome to Moscow, then?.... Hi! take away!" he called to the Tatar.
"You guess?" responded Levin, his eyes like deep wells of light fixed onStepan Arkadyevitch.
"I guess, but I can’t be the first to talk about it. You can see by thatwhether I guess right or wrong," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, gazing atLevin with a subtle smile.
"Well, and what have you to say to me?" said Levin in a quivering voice,feeling that all the muscles of his face were quivering too. "How do youlook at the question?"
Stepan Arkadyevitch slowly emptied his glass of Chablis, never takinghis eyes off Levin.
"I?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, "there’s nothing I desire so much asthat—nothing! It would be the best thing that could be."
"But you’re not making a mistake? You know what we’re speaking of?" saidLevin, piercing him with his eyes. "You think it’s possible?"
"I think it’s possible. Why not possible?"
"No! do you really think it’s possible? No, tell me all you think! Oh,but if ... if refusal’s in store for me!... Indeed I feel sure..."
"Why should you think that?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling at hisexcitement.
"It seems so to me sometimes. That will be awful for me, and for hertoo."
"Oh, well, anyway there’s nothing awful in it for a girl. Every girl’sproud of an offer."
"Yes, every girl, but not she."
Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled. He so well knew that feeling of Levin’s,that for him all the girls in the world were divided into two classes:one class—all the girls in the world except her, and those girls withall sorts of human weaknesses, and very ordinary girls: the otherclass—she alone, having no weaknesses of any sort and higher than allhumanity.
"Stay, take some sauce," he said, holding back Levin’s hand as it pushedaway the sauce.
Levin obediently helped himself to sauce, but would not let StepanArkadyevitch go on with his dinner.
"No, stop a minute, stop a minute," he said. "You must understand thatit’s a question of life and death for me. I have never spoken to any oneof this. And there’s no one I could speak of it to, except you. You knowwe’re utterly unlike each other, different tastes and views andeverything; but I know you’re fond of me and understand me, and that’swhy I like you awfully. But for God’s sake, be quite straightforwardwith me."
"I tell you what I think," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling. "But I’llsay more: my wife is a wonderful woman..." Stepan Arkadyevitch sighed,remembering his position with his wife, and, after a moment’s silence,resumed—"She has a gift of foreseeing things. She sees right throughpeople; but that’s not all; she knows what will come to pass, especiallyin the way of marriages. She foretold, for instance, that PrincessShahovskaya would marry Brenteln. No one would believe it, but it cameto pass. And she’s on your side."
"How do you mean?"
"It’s not only that she likes you—she says that Kitty is certain to beyour wife."
At these words Levin’s face suddenly lighted up with a smile, a smilenot far from tears of emotion.
"She says that!" cried Levin. "I always said she was exquisite, yourwife. There, that’s enough, enough said about it," he said, getting upfrom his seat.
"All right, but do sit down."
But Levin could not sit down. He walked with his firm tread twice up anddown the little cage of a room, blinked his eyelids that his tears mightnot fall, and only then sat down to the table.
"You must understand," said he, "it’s not love. I’ve been in love, butit’s not that. It’s not my feeling, but a sort of force outside me hastaken possession of me. I went away, you see, because I made up my mindthat it could never be, you understand, as a happiness that does notcome on earth; but I’ve struggled with myself, I see there’s no livingwithout it. And it must be settled."
"What did you go away for?"
"Ah, stop a minute! Ah, the thoughts that come crowding on one! Thequestions one must ask oneself! Listen. You can’t imagine what you’vedone for me by what you said. I’m so happy that I’ve become positivelyhateful; I’ve forgotten everything. I heard today that my brotherNikolay ... you know, he’s here ... I had even forgotten him. It seemsto me that he’s happy too. It’s a sort of madness. But one thing’sawful.... Here, you’ve been married, you know the feeling ... it’s awfulthat we—old—with a past ... not of love, but of sins ... are brought allat once so near to a creature pure and innocent; it’s loathsome, andthat’s why one can’t help feeling oneself unworthy."
"Oh, well, you’ve not many sins on your conscience."
"Alas! all the same," said Levin, "when with loathing I go over my life,I shudder and curse and bitterly regret it.... Yes."
"What would you have? The world’s made so," said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
"The one comfort is like that prayer, which I always liked: ‘Forgive menot according to my unworthiness, but according to Thy lovingkindness.’That’s the only way she can forgive me."


Chapter 11

Levin emptied his glass, and they were silent for a while.
"There’s one other thing I ought to tell you. Do you know Vronsky?"Stepan Arkadyevitch asked Levin.
"No, I don’t. Why do you ask?"
"Give us another bottle," Stepan Arkadyevitch directed the Tatar, whowas filling up their glasses and fidgeting round them just when he wasnot wanted.
"Why you ought to know Vronsky is that he’s one of your rivals."
"Who’s Vronsky?" said Levin, and his face was suddenly transformed fromthe look of childlike ecstasy which Oblonsky had just been admiring toan angry and unpleasant expression.
"Vronsky is one of the sons of Count Kirill Ivanovitch Vronsky, and oneof the finest specimens of the gilded youth of Petersburg. I made hisacquaintance in Tver when I was there on official business, and he camethere for the levy of recruits. Fearfully rich, handsome, greatconnections, an aide-de-camp, and with all that a very nice,good-natured fellow. But he’s more than simply a good-natured fellow, asI’ve found out here—he’s a cultivated man, too, and very intelligent;he’s a man who’ll make his mark."
Levin scowled and was dumb.
"Well, he turned up here soon after you’d gone, and as I can see, he’sover head and ears in love with Kitty, and you know that her mother..."
"Excuse me, but I know nothing," said Levin, frowning gloomily. Andimmediately he recollected his brother Nikolay and how hateful he was tohave been able to forget him.
"You wait a bit, wait a bit," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling andtouching his hand. "I’ve told you what I know, and I repeat that in thisdelicate and tender matter, as far as one can conjecture, I believe thechances are in your favor."
Levin dropped back in his chair; his face was pale.
"But I would advise you to settle the thing as soon as may be," pursuedOblonsky, filling up his glass.
"No, thanks, I can’t drink any more," said Levin, pushing away hisglass. "I shall be drunk.... Come, tell me how are you getting on?" hewent on, obviously anxious to change the conversation.
"One word more: in any case I advise you to settle the question soon.Tonight I don’t advise you to speak," said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "Goround tomorrow morning, make an offer in due form, and God bless you..."
"Oh, do you still think of coming to me for some shooting? Come nextspring, do," said Levin.
Now his whole soul was full of remorse that he had begun thisconversation with Stepan Arkadyevitch. A feeling such as his wasprofaned by talk of the rivalry of some Petersburg officer, of thesuppositions and the counsels of Stepan Arkadyevitch.
Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled. He knew what was passing in Levin’s soul.
"I’ll come some day," he said. "But women, my boy, they’re the pivoteverything turns upon. Things are in a bad way with me, very bad. Andit’s all through women. Tell me frankly now," he pursued, picking up acigar and keeping one hand on his glass; "give me your advice."
"Why, what is it?"
"I’ll tell you. Suppose you’re married, you love your wife, but you’refascinated by another woman..."
"Excuse me, but I’m absolutely unable to comprehend how ... just as Ican’t comprehend how I could now, after my dinner, go straight to abaker’s shop and steal a roll."
Stepan Arkadyevitch’s eyes sparkled more than usual.
"Why not? A roll will sometimes smell so good one can’t resist it."
    "Himmlisch ist’s, wenn ich bezwungen    Meine irdische Begier;    Aber doch wenn’s nich gelungen    Hatt’ ich auch recht huebsch Plaisir!"
As he said this, Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled subtly. Levin, too, couldnot help smiling.
"Yes, but joking apart," resumed Stepan Arkadyevitch, "you mustunderstand that the woman is a sweet, gentle loving creature, poor andlonely, and has sacrificed everything. Now, when the thing’s done, don’tyou see, can one possibly cast her off? Even supposing one parts fromher, so as not to break up one’s family life, still, can one helpfeeling for her, setting her on her feet, softening her lot?"
"Well, you must excuse me there. You know to me all women are dividedinto two classes ... at least no ... truer to say: there are women andthere are ... I’ve never seen exquisite fallen beings, and I never shallsee them, but such creatures as that painted Frenchwoman at the counterwith the ringlets are vermin to my mind, and all fallen women are thesame."
"But the Magdalen?"
"Ah, drop that! Christ would never have said those words if He had knownhow they would be abused. Of all the Gospel those words are the onlyones remembered. However, I’m not saying so much what I think, as what Ifeel. I have a loathing for fallen women. You’re afraid of spiders, andI of these vermin. Most likely you’ve not made a study of spiders anddon’t know their character; and so it is with me."
"It’s very well for you to talk like that; it’s very much like thatgentleman in Dickens who used to fling all difficult questions over hisright shoulder. But to deny the facts is no answer. What’s to bedone—you tell me that, what’s to be done? Your wife gets older, whileyou’re full of life. Before you’ve time to look round, you feel that youcan’t love your wife with love, however much you may esteem her. Andthen all at once love turns up, and you’re done for, done for," StepanArkadyevitch said with weary despair.
Levin half smiled.
"Yes, you’re done for," resumed Oblonsky. "But what’s to be done?"
"Don’t steal rolls."
Stepan Arkadyevitch laughed outright.
"Oh, moralist! But you must understand, there are two women; one insistsonly on her rights, and those rights are your love, which you can’t giveher; and the other sacrifices everything for you and asks for nothing.What are you to do? How are you to act? There’s a fearful tragedy init."
"If you care for my profession of faith as regards that, I’ll tell youthat I don’t believe there was any tragedy about it. And this is why. Tomy mind, love ... both the sorts of love, which you remember Platodefines in his Banquet, served as the test of men. Some men onlyunderstand one sort, and some only the other. And those who only knowthe non-platonic love have no need to talk of tragedy. In such lovethere can be no sort of tragedy. ‘I’m much obliged for thegratification, my humble respects’—that’s all the tragedy. And inplatonic love there can be no tragedy, because in that love all is clearand pure, because..."
At that instant Levin recollected his own sins and the inner conflict hehad lived through. And he added unexpectedly:
"But perhaps you are right. Very likely ... I don’t know, I don’t know."
"It’s this, don’t you see," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, "you’re very muchall of a piece. That’s your strong point and your failing. You have acharacter that’s all of a piece, and you want the whole of life to be ofa piece too—but that’s not how it is. You despise public official workbecause you want the reality to be invariably corresponding all thewhile with the aim—and that’s not how it is. You want a man’s work, too,always to have a defined aim, and love and family life always to beundivided—and that’s not how it is. All the variety, all the charm, allthe beauty of life is made up of light and shadow."
Levin sighed and made no reply. He was thinking of his own affairs, anddid not hear Oblonsky.
And suddenly both of them felt that though they were friends, thoughthey had been dining and drinking together, which should have drawn themcloser, yet each was thinking only of his own affairs, and they hadnothing to do with one another. Oblonsky had more than once experiencedthis extreme sense of aloofness, instead of intimacy, coming on afterdinner, and he knew what to do in such cases.
"Bill!" he called, and he went into the next room where he promptly cameacross an aide-de-camp of his acquaintance and dropped into conversationwith him about an actress and her protector. And at once in theconversation with the aide-de-camp Oblonsky had a sense of relaxationand relief after the conversation with Levin, which always put him totoo great a mental and spiritual strain.
When the Tatar appeared with a bill for twenty-six roubles and oddkopecks, besides a tip for himself, Levin, who would another time havebeen horrified, like any one from the country, at his share of fourteenroubles, did not notice it, paid, and set off homewards to dress and goto the Shtcherbatskys’ there to decide his fate.


Chapter 12

The young Princess Kitty Shtcherbatskaya was eighteen. It was the firstwinter that she had been out in the world. Her success in society hadbeen greater than that of either of her elder sisters, and greater eventhan her mother had anticipated. To say nothing of the young men whodanced at the Moscow balls being almost all in love with Kitty, twoserious suitors had already this first winter made their appearance:Levin, and immediately after his departure, Count Vronsky.
Levin’s appearance at the beginning of the winter, his frequent visits,and evident love for Kitty, had led to the first serious conversationsbetween Kitty’s parents as to her future, and to disputes between them.The prince was on Levin’s side; he said he wished for nothing better forKitty. The princess for her part, going round the question in the mannerpeculiar to women, maintained that Kitty was too young, that Levin haddone nothing to prove that he had serious intentions, that Kitty felt nogreat attraction to him, and other side issues; but she did not statethe principal point, which was that she looked for a better match forher daughter, and that Levin was not to her liking, and she did notunderstand him. When Levin had abruptly departed, the princess wasdelighted, and said to her husband triumphantly: "You see I was right."When Vronsky appeared on the scene, she was still more delighted,confirmed in her opinion that Kitty was to make not simply a good, but abrilliant match.
In the mother’s eyes there could be no comparison between Vronsky andLevin. She disliked in Levin his strange and uncompromising opinions andhis shyness in society, founded, as she supposed, on his pride and hisqueer sort of life, as she considered it, absorbed in cattle andpeasants. She did not very much like it that he, who was in love withher daughter, had kept coming to the house for six weeks, as though hewere waiting for something, inspecting, as though he were afraid hemight be doing them too great an honor by making an offer, and did notrealize that a man, who continually visits at a house where there is ayoung unmarried girl, is bound to make his intentions clear. Andsuddenly, without doing so, he disappeared. "It’s as well he’s notattractive enough for Kitty to have fallen in love with him," thoughtthe mother.
Vronsky satisfied all the mother’s desires. Very wealthy, clever, ofaristocratic family, on the highroad to a brilliant career in the armyand at court, and a fascinating man. Nothing better could be wished for.
Vronsky openly flirted with Kitty at balls, danced with her, and camecontinually to the house, consequently there could be no doubt of theseriousness of his intentions. But, in spite of that, the mother hadspent the whole of that winter in a state of terrible anxiety andagitation.
Princess Shtcherbatskaya had herself been married thirty years ago, heraunt arranging the match. Her husband, about whom everything was wellknown before hand, had come, looked at his future bride, and been lookedat. The match-making aunt had ascertained and communicated their mutualimpression. That impression had been favorable. Afterwards, on a dayfixed beforehand, the expected offer was made to her parents, andaccepted. All had passed very simply and easily. So it seemed, at least,to the princess. But over her own daughters she had felt how far fromsimple and easy is the business, apparently so commonplace, of marryingoff one’s daughters. The panics that had been lived through, thethoughts that had been brooded over, the money that had been wasted, andthe disputes with her husband over marrying the two elder girls, Daryaand Natalia! Now, since the youngest had come out, she was going throughthe same terrors, the same doubts, and still more violent quarrels withher husband than she had over the elder girls. The old prince, like allfathers indeed, was exceedingly punctilious on the score of the honorand reputation of his daughters. He was irrationally jealous over hisdaughters, especially over Kitty, who was his favorite. At every turn hehad scenes with the princess for compromising her daughter. The princesshad grown accustomed to this already with her other daughters, but nowshe felt that there was more ground for the prince’s touchiness. She sawthat of late years much was changed in the manners of society, that amother’s duties had become still more difficult. She saw that girls ofKitty’s age formed some sort of clubs, went to some sort of lectures,mixed freely in men’s society; drove about the streets alone, many ofthem did not curtsey, and, what was the most important thing, all thegirls were firmly convinced that to choose their husbands was their ownaffair, and not their parents’. "Marriages aren’t made nowadays as theyused to be," was thought and said by all these young girls, and even bytheir elders. But how marriages were made now, the princess could notlearn from any one. The French fashion—of the parents arranging theirchildren’s future—was not accepted; it was condemned. The Englishfashion of the complete independence of girls was also not accepted, andnot possible in Russian society. The Russian fashion of match-making bythe offices of intermediate persons was for some reason consideredunseemly; it was ridiculed by every one, and by the princess herself.But how girls were to be married, and how parents were to marry them, noone knew. Everyone with whom the princess had chanced to discuss thematter said the same thing: "Mercy on us, it’s high time in our day tocast off all that old-fashioned business. It’s the young people have tomarry; and not their parents; and so we ought to leave the young peopleto arrange it as they choose." It was very easy for anyone to say thatwho had no daughters, but the princess realized that in the process ofgetting to know each other, her daughter might fall in love, and fall inlove with someone who did not care to marry her or who was quite unfitto be her husband. And, however much it was instilled into the princessthat in our times young people ought to arrange their lives forthemselves, she was unable to believe it, just as she would have beenunable to believe that, at any time whatever, the most suitableplaythings for children five years old ought to be loaded pistols. Andso the princess was more uneasy over Kitty than she had been over herelder sisters.
Now she was afraid that Vronsky might confine himself to simply flirtingwith her daughter. She saw that her daughter was in love with him, buttried to comfort herself with the thought that he was an honorable man,and would not do this. But at the same time she knew how easy it is,with the freedom of manners of today, to turn a girl’s head, and howlightly men generally regard such a crime. The week before, Kitty hadtold her mother of a conversation she had with Vronsky during a mazurka.This conversation had partly reassured the princess; but perfectly atease she could not be. Vronsky had told Kitty that both he and hisbrother were so used to obeying their mother that they never made uptheir minds to any important undertaking without consulting her. "Andjust now, I am impatiently awaiting my mother’s arrival from Petersburg,as peculiarly fortunate," he told her.
Kitty had repeated this without attaching any significance to the words.But her mother saw them in a different light. She knew that the old ladywas expected from day to day, that she would be pleased at her son’schoice, and she felt it strange that he should not make his offerthrough fear of vexing his mother. However, she was so anxious for themarriage itself, and still more for relief from her fears, that shebelieved it was so. Bitter as it was for the princess to see theunhappiness of her eldest daughter, Dolly, on the point of leaving herhusband, her anxiety over the decision of her youngest daughter’s fateengrossed all her feelings. Today, with Levin’s reappearance, a freshsource of anxiety arose. She was afraid that her daughter, who had atone time, as she fancied, a feeling for Levin, might, from extreme senseof honor, refuse Vronsky, and that Levin’s arrival might generallycomplicate and delay the affair so near being concluded.
"Why, has he been here long?" the princess asked about Levin, as theyreturned home.
"He came today, mamma."
"There’s one thing I want to say..." began the princess, and from herserious and alert face, Kitty guessed what it would be.
"Mamma," she said, flushing hotly and turning quickly to her, "please,please don’t say anything about that. I know, I know all about it."
She wished for what her mother wished for, but the motives of hermother’s wishes wounded her.
"I only want to say that to raise hopes..."
"Mamma, darling, for goodness’ sake, don’t talk about it. It’s sohorrible to talk about it."
"I won’t," said her mother, seeing the tears in her daughter’s eyes;"but one thing, my love; you promised me you would have no secrets fromme. You won’t?"
"Never, mamma, none," answered Kitty, flushing a little, and looking hermother straight in the face, "but there’s no use in my telling youanything, and I ... I ... if I wanted to, I don’t know what to say orhow ... I don’t know..."
"No, she could not tell an untruth with those eyes," thought the mother,smiling at her agitation and happiness. The princess smiled that whatwas taking place just now in her soul seemed to the poor child soimmense and so important.


Chapter 13

After dinner, and till the beginning of the evening, Kitty was feeling asensation akin to the sensation of a young man before a battle. Herheart throbbed violently, and her thoughts would not rest on anything.
She felt that this evening, when they would both meet for the firsttime, would be a turning point in her life. And she was continuallypicturing them to herself, at one moment each separately, and then bothtogether. When she mused on the past, she dwelt with pleasure, withtenderness, on the memories of her relations with Levin. The memories ofchildhood and of Levin’s friendship with her dead brother gave a specialpoetic charm to her relations with him. His love for her, of which shefelt certain, was flattering and delightful to her; and it was pleasantfor her to think of Levin. In her memories of Vronsky there alwaysentered a certain element of awkwardness, though he was in the highestdegree well-bred and at ease, as though there were some false note—notin Vronsky, he was very simple and nice, but in herself, while withLevin she felt perfectly simple and clear. But, on the other hand,directly she thought of the future with Vronsky, there arose before hera perspective of brilliant happiness; with Levin the future seemedmisty.
When she went upstairs to dress, and looked into the looking-glass, shenoticed with joy that it was one of her good days, and that she was incomplete possession of all her forces,—she needed this so for what laybefore her: she was conscious of external composure and free grace inher movements.
At half-past seven she had only just gone down into the drawing room,when the footman announced, "Konstantin Dmitrievitch Levin." Theprincess was still in her room, and the prince had not come in. "So itis to be," thought Kitty, and all the blood seemed to rush to her heart.She was horrified at her paleness, as she glanced into thelooking-glass. At that moment she knew beyond doubt that he had comeearly on purpose to find her alone and to make her an offer. And onlythen for the first time the whole thing presented itself in a new,different aspect; only then she realized that the question did notaffect her only—with whom she would be happy, and whom she loved—butthat she would have that moment to wound a man whom she liked. And towound him cruelly. What for? Because he, dear fellow, loved her, was inlove with her. But there was no help for it, so it must be, so it wouldhave to be.
"My God! shall I myself really have to say it to him?" she thought. "CanI tell him I don’t love him? That will be a lie. What am I to say tohim? That I love someone else? No, that’s impossible. I’m going away,I’m going away."
She had reached the door, when she heard his step. "No! it’s not honest.What have I to be afraid of? I have done nothing wrong. What is to be,will be! I’ll tell the truth. And with him one can’t be ill at ease.Here he is," she said to herself, seeing his powerful, shy figure, withhis shining eyes fixed on her. She looked straight into his face, asthough imploring him to spare her, and gave her hand.
"It’s not time yet; I think I’m too early," he said glancing round theempty drawing room. When he saw that his expectations were realized,that there was nothing to prevent him from speaking, his face becamegloomy.
"Oh, no," said Kitty, and sat down at the table.
"But this was just what I wanted, to find you alone," he began, notsitting down, and not looking at her, so as not to lose courage.
"Mamma will be down directly. She was very much tired.... Yesterday..."
She talked on, not knowing what her lips were uttering, and not takingher supplicating and caressing eyes off him.
He glanced at her; she blushed, and ceased speaking.
"I told you I did not know whether I should be here long ... that itdepended on you..."
She dropped her head lower and lower, not knowing herself what answershe should make to what was coming.
"That it depended on you," he repeated. "I meant to say ... I meant tosay ... I came for this ... to be my wife!" he brought out, not knowingwhat he was saying; but feeling that the most terrible thing was said,he stopped short and looked at her...
She was breathing heavily, not looking at him. She was feeling ecstasy.Her soul was flooded with happiness. She had never anticipated that theutterance of love would produce such a powerful effect on her. But itlasted only an instant. She remembered Vronsky. She lifted her clear,truthful eyes, and seeing his desperate face, she answered hastily:
"That cannot be ... forgive me."
A moment ago, and how close she had been to him, of what importance inhis life! And how aloof and remote from him she had become now!
"It was bound to be so," he said, not looking at her.
He bowed, and was meaning to retreat.


Chapter 14

But at that very moment the princess came in. There was a look of horroron her face when she saw them alone, and their disturbed faces. Levinbowed to her, and said nothing. Kitty did not speak nor lift her eyes."Thank God, she has refused him," thought the mother, and her facelighted up with the habitual smile with which she greeted her guests onThursdays. She sat down and began questioning Levin about his life inthe country. He sat down again, waiting for other visitors to arrive, inorder to retreat unnoticed.
Five minutes later there came in a friend of Kitty’s, married thepreceding winter, Countess Nordston.
She was a thin, sallow, sickly, and nervous woman, with brilliant blackeyes. She was fond of Kitty, and her affection for her showed itself, asthe affection of married women for girls always does, in the desire tomake a match for Kitty after her own ideal of married happiness; shewanted her to marry Vronsky. Levin she had often met at theShtcherbatskys’ early in the winter, and she had always disliked him.Her invariable and favorite pursuit, when they met, consisted in makingfun of him.
"I do like it when he looks down at me from the height of his grandeur,or breaks off his learned conversation with me because I’m a fool, or iscondescending to me. I like that so; to see him condescending! I am soglad he can’t bear me," she used to say of him.
She was right, for Levin actually could not bear her, and despised herfor what she was proud of and regarded as a fine characteristic—hernervousness, her delicate contempt and indifference for everythingcoarse and earthly.
The Countess Nordston and Levin got into that relation with one anothernot seldom seen in society, when two persons, who remain externally onfriendly terms, despise each other to such a degree that they cannoteven take each other seriously, and cannot even be offended by eachother.
The Countess Nordston pounced upon Levin at once.
"Ah, Konstantin Dmitrievitch! So you’ve come back to our corruptBabylon," she said, giving him her tiny, yellow hand, and recalling whathe had chanced to say early in the winter, that Moscow was a Babylon."Come, is Babylon reformed, or have you degenerated?" she added,glancing with a simper at Kitty.
"It’s very flattering for me, countess, that you remember my words sowell," responded Levin, who had succeeded in recovering his composure,and at once from habit dropped into his tone of joking hostility to theCountess Nordston. "They must certainly make a great impression on you."
"Oh, I should think so! I always note them all down. Well, Kitty, haveyou been skating again?..."
And she began talking to Kitty. Awkward as it was for Levin to withdrawnow, it would still have been easier for him to perpetrate thisawkwardness than to remain all the evening and see Kitty, who glanced athim now and then and avoided his eyes. He was on the point of gettingup, when the princess, noticing that he was silent, addressed him.
"Shall you be long in Moscow? You’re busy with the district council,though, aren’t you, and can’t be away for long?"
"No, princess, I’m no longer a member of the council," he said. "I havecome up for a few days."
"There’s something the matter with him," thought Countess Nordston,glancing at his stern, serious face. "He isn’t in his old argumentativemood. But I’ll draw him out. I do love making a fool of him beforeKitty, and I’ll do it."
"Konstantin Dmitrievitch," she said to him, "do explain to me, please,what’s the meaning of it. You know all about such things. At home in ourvillage of Kaluga all the peasants and all the women have drunk up allthey possessed, and now they can’t pay us any rent. What’s the meaningof that? You always praise the peasants so."
At that instant another lady came into the room, and Levin got up.
"Excuse me, countess, but I really know nothing about it, and can’t tellyou anything," he said, and looked round at the officer who came inbehind the lady.
"That must be Vronsky," thought Levin, and, to be sure of it, glanced atKitty. She had already had time to look at Vronsky, and looked round atLevin. And simply from the look in her eyes, that grew unconsciouslybrighter, Levin knew that she loved that man, knew it as surely as ifshe had told him so in words. But what sort of a man was he? Now,whether for good or for ill, Levin could not choose but remain; he mustfind out what the man was like whom she loved.
There are people who, on meeting a successful rival, no matter in what,are at once disposed to turn their backs on everything good in him, andto see only what is bad. There are people, on the other hand, who desireabove all to find in that lucky rival the qualities by which he hasoutstripped them, and seek with a throbbing ache at heart only what isgood. Levin belonged to the second class. But he had no difficulty infinding what was good and attractive in Vronsky. It was apparent at thefirst glance. Vronsky was a squarely built, dark man, not very tall,with a good-humored, handsome, and exceedingly calm and resolute face.Everything about his face and figure, from his short-cropped black hairand freshly shaven chin down to his loosely fitting, brand-new uniform,was simple and at the same time elegant. Making way for the lady who hadcome in, Vronsky went up to the princess and then to Kitty.
As he approached her, his beautiful eyes shone with a specially tenderlight, and with a faint, happy, and modestly triumphant smile (so itseemed to Levin), bowing carefully and respectfully over her, he heldout his small broad hand to her.
Greeting and saying a few words to everyone, he sat down without onceglancing at Levin, who had never taken his eyes off him.
"Let me introduce you," said the princess, indicating Levin. "KonstantinDmitrievitch Levin, Count Alexey Kirillovitch Vronsky."
Vronsky got up and, looking cordially at Levin, shook hands with him.
"I believe I was to have dined with you this winter," he said, smilinghis simple and open smile; "but you had unexpectedly left for thecountry."
"Konstantin Dmitrievitch despises and hates town and us townspeople,"said Countess Nordston.
"My words must make a deep impression on you, since you remember them sowell," said Levin, and, suddenly conscious that he had said just thesame thing before, he reddened.
Vronsky looked at Levin and Countess Nordston, and smiled.
"Are you always in the country?" he inquired. "I should think it must bedull in the winter."
"It’s not dull if one has work to do; besides, one’s not dull byoneself," Levin replied abruptly.
"I am fond of the country," said Vronsky, noticing, and affecting not tonotice, Levin’s tone.
"But I hope, count, you would not consent to live in the countryalways," said Countess Nordston.
"I don’t know; I have never tried for long. I experienced a queerfeeling once," he went on. "I never longed so for the country, Russiancountry, with bast shoes and peasants, as when I was spending a winterwith my mother in Nice. Nice itself is dull enough, you know. Andindeed, Naples and Sorrento are only pleasant for a short time. And it’sjust there that Russia comes back to me most vividly, and especially thecountry. It’s as though..."
He talked on, addressing both Kitty and Levin, turning his serene,friendly eyes from one to the other, and saying obviously just what cameinto his head.
Noticing that Countess Nordston wanted to say something, he stoppedshort without finishing what he had begun, and listened attentively toher.
The conversation did not flag for an instant, so that the princess, whoalways kept in reserve, in case a subject should be lacking, two heavyguns—the relative advantages of classical and of modern education, anduniversal military service—had not to move out either of them, whileCountess Nordston had not a chance of chaffing Levin.
Levin wanted to, and could not, take part in the general conversation;saying to himself every instant, "Now go," he still did not go, asthough waiting for something.
The conversation fell upon table-turning and spirits, and CountessNordston, who believed in spiritualism, began to describe the marvelsshe had seen.
"Ah, countess, you really must take me, for pity’s sake do take me tosee them! I have never seen anything extraordinary, though I am alwayson the lookout for it everywhere," said Vronsky, smiling.
"Very well, next Saturday," answered Countess Nordston. "But you,Konstantin Dmitrievitch, do you believe in it?" she asked Levin.
"Why do you ask me? You know what I shall say."
"But I want to hear your opinion."
"My opinion," answered Levin, "is only that this table-turning simplyproves that educated society—so called—is no higher than the peasants.They believe in the evil eye, and in witchcraft and omens, while we..."
"Oh, then you don’t believe in it?"
"I can’t believe in it, countess."
"But if I’ve seen it myself?"
"The peasant women too tell us they have seen goblins."
"Then you think I tell a lie?"
And she laughed a mirthless laugh.
"Oh, no, Masha, Konstantin Dmitrievitch said he could not believe init," said Kitty, blushing for Levin, and Levin saw this, and, still moreexasperated, would have answered, but Vronsky with his bright franksmile rushed to the support of the conversation, which was threateningto become disagreeable.
"You do not admit the conceivability at all?" he queried. "But why not?We admit the existence of electricity, of which we know nothing. Whyshould there not be some new force, still unknown to us, which..."
"When electricity was discovered," Levin interrupted hurriedly, "it wasonly the phenomenon that was discovered, and it was unknown from what itproceeded and what were its effects, and ages passed before itsapplications were conceived. But the spiritualists have begun withtables writing for them, and spirits appearing to them, and have onlylater started saying that it is an unknown force."
Vronsky listened attentively to Levin, as he always did listen,obviously interested in his words.
"Yes, but the spiritualists say we don’t know at present what this forceis, but there is a force, and these are the conditions in which it acts.Let the scientific men find out what the force consists in. No, I don’tsee why there should not be a new force, if it..."
"Why, because with electricity," Levin interrupted again, "every timeyou rub tar against wool, a recognized phenomenon is manifested, but inthis case it does not happen every time, and so it follows it is not anatural phenomenon."
Feeling probably that the conversation was taking a tone too serious fora drawing room, Vronsky made no rejoinder, but by way of trying tochange the conversation, he smiled brightly, and turned to the ladies.
"Do let us try at once, countess," he said; but Levin would finishsaying what he thought.
"I think," he went on, "that this attempt of the spiritualists toexplain their marvels as some sort of new natural force is most futile.They boldly talk of spiritual force, and then try to subject it tomaterial experiment."
Every one was waiting for him to finish, and he felt it.
"And I think you would be a first-rate medium," said Countess Nordston;"there’s something enthusiastic in you."
Levin opened his mouth, was about to say something, reddened, and saidnothing.
"Do let us try table-turning at once, please," said Vronsky. "Princess,will you allow it?"
And Vronsky stood up, looking for a little table.
Kitty got up to fetch a table, and as she passed, her eyes met Levin’s.She felt for him with her whole heart, the more because she was pityinghim for suffering of which she was herself the cause. "If you canforgive me, forgive me," said her eyes, "I am so happy."
"I hate them all, and you, and myself," his eyes responded, and he tookup his hat. But he was not destined to escape. Just as they werearranging themselves round the table, and Levin was on the point ofretiring, the old prince came in, and after greeting the ladies,addressed Levin.
"Ah!" he began joyously. "Been here long, my boy? I didn’t even know youwere in town. Very glad to see you." The old prince embraced Levin, andtalking to him did not observe Vronsky, who had risen, and was serenelywaiting till the prince should turn to him.
Kitty felt how distasteful her father’s warmth was to Levin after whathad happened. She saw, too, how coldly her father responded at last toVronsky’s bow, and how Vronsky looked with amiable perplexity at herfather, as though trying and failing to understand how and why anyonecould be hostilely disposed towards him, and she flushed.
"Prince, let us have Konstantin Dmitrievitch," said Countess Nordston;"we want to try an experiment."
"What experiment? Table-turning? Well, you must excuse me, ladies andgentlemen, but to my mind it is better fun to play the ring game," saidthe old prince, looking at Vronsky, and guessing that it had been hissuggestion. "There’s some sense in that, anyway."
Vronsky looked wonderingly at the prince with his resolute eyes, and,with a faint smile, began immediately talking to Countess Nordston ofthe great ball that was to come off next week.
"I hope you will be there?" he said to Kitty. As soon as the old princeturned away from him, Levin went out unnoticed, and the last impressionhe carried away with him of that evening was the smiling, happy face ofKitty answering Vronsky’s inquiry about the ball.


Chapter 15

At the end of the evening Kitty told her mother of her conversation withLevin, and in spite of all the pity she felt for Levin, she was glad atthe thought that she had received an _offer_. She had no doubt that shehad acted rightly. But after she had gone to bed, for a long while shecould not sleep. One impression pursued her relentlessly. It was Levin’sface, with his scowling brows, and his kind eyes looking out in darkdejection below them, as he stood listening to her father, and glancingat her and at Vronsky. And she felt so sorry for him that tears cameinto her eyes. But immediately she thought of the man for whom she hadgiven him up. She vividly recalled his manly, resolute face, his nobleself-possession, and the good nature conspicuous in everything towardseveryone. She remembered the love for her of the man she loved, and oncemore all was gladness in her soul, and she lay on the pillow, smilingwith happiness. "I’m sorry, I’m sorry; but what could I do? It’s not myfault," she said to herself; but an inner voice told her something else.Whether she felt remorse at having won Levin’s love, or at havingrefused him, she did not know. But her happiness was poisoned by doubts."Lord, have pity on us; Lord, have pity on us; Lord, have pity on us!"she repeated to herself, till she fell asleep.
Meanwhile there took place below, in the prince’s little library, one ofthe scenes so often repeated between the parents on account of theirfavorite daughter.
"What? I’ll tell you what!" shouted the prince, waving his arms, and atonce wrapping his squirrel-lined dressing-gown round him again. "Thatyou’ve no pride, no dignity; that you’re disgracing, ruining yourdaughter by this vulgar, stupid match-making!"
"But, really, for mercy’s sake, prince, what have I done?" said theprincess, almost crying.
She, pleased and happy after her conversation with her daughter, hadgone to the prince to say good-night as usual, and though she had nointention of telling him of Levin’s offer and Kitty’s refusal, still shehinted to her husband that she fancied things were practically settledwith Vronsky, and that he would declare himself so soon as his motherarrived. And thereupon, at those words, the prince had all at once flowninto a passion, and began to use unseemly language.
"What have you done? I’ll tell you what. First of all, you’re trying tocatch an eligible gentleman, and all Moscow will be talking of it, andwith good reason. If you have evening parties, invite everyone, don’tpick out the possible suitors. Invite all the young bucks. Engage apiano player, and let them dance, and not as you do things nowadays,hunting up good matches. It makes me sick, sick to see it, and you’vegone on till you’ve turned the poor wench’s head. Levin’s a thousandtimes the better man. As for this little Petersburg swell, they’returned out by machinery, all on one pattern, and all precious rubbish.But if he were a prince of the blood, my daughter need not run afteranyone."
"But what have I done?"
"Why, you’ve..." The prince was crying wrathfully.
"I know if one were to listen to you," interrupted the princess, "weshould never marry our daughter. If it’s to be so, we’d better go intothe country."
"Well, and we had better."
"But do wait a minute. Do I try and catch them? I don’t try to catchthem in the least. A young man, and a very nice one, has fallen in lovewith her, and she, I fancy..."
"Oh, yes, you fancy! And how if she really is in love, and he’s no morethinking of marriage than I am!... Oh, that I should live to see it! Ah!spiritualism! Ah! Nice! Ah! the ball!" And the prince, imagining that hewas mimicking his wife, made a mincing curtsey at each word. "And thisis how we’re preparing wretchedness for Kitty; and she’s really got thenotion into her head..."
"But what makes you suppose so?"
"I don’t suppose; I know. We have eyes for such things, thoughwomen-folk haven’t. I see a man who has serious intentions, that’sLevin: and I see a peacock, like this feather-head, who’s only amusinghimself."
"Oh, well, when once you get an idea into your head!..."
"Well, you’ll remember my words, but too late, just as with Dolly."
"Well, well, we won’t talk of it," the princess stopped him,recollecting her unlucky Dolly.
"By all means, and good night!"
And signing each other with the cross, the husband and wife parted witha kiss, feeling that they each remained of their own opinion.
The princess had at first been quite certain that that evening hadsettled Kitty’s future, and that there could be no doubt of Vronsky’sintentions, but her husband’s words had disturbed her. And returning toher own room, in terror before the unknown future, she, too, like Kitty,repeated several times in her heart, "Lord, have pity; Lord, have pity;Lord, have pity."


Chapter 16

Vronsky had never had a real home life. His mother had been in her youtha brilliant society woman, who had had during her married life, andstill more afterwards, many love affairs notorious in the wholefashionable world. His father he scarcely remembered, and he had beeneducated in the Corps of Pages.
Leaving the school very young as a brilliant officer, he had at once gotinto the circle of wealthy Petersburg army men. Although he did go moreor less into Petersburg society, his love affairs had always hithertobeen outside it.
In Moscow he had for the first time felt, after his luxurious and coarselife at Petersburg, all the charm of intimacy with a sweet and innocentgirl of his own rank, who cared for him. It never even entered his headthat there could be any harm in his relations with Kitty. At balls hedanced principally with her. He was a constant visitor at their house.He talked to her as people commonly do talk in society—all sorts ofnonsense, but nonsense to which he could not help attaching a specialmeaning in her case. Although he said nothing to her that he could nothave said before everybody, he felt that she was becoming more and moredependent upon him, and the more he felt this, the better he liked it,and the tenderer was his feeling for her. He did not know that his modeof behavior in relation to Kitty had a definite character, that it iscourting young girls with no intention of marriage, and that suchcourting is one of the evil actions common among brilliant young mensuch as he was. It seemed to him that he was the first who haddiscovered this pleasure, and he was enjoying his discovery.
If he could have heard what her parents were saying that evening, if hecould have put himself at the point of view of the family and have heardthat Kitty would be unhappy if he did not marry her, he would have beengreatly astonished, and would not have believed it. He could not believethat what gave such great and delicate pleasure to him, and above all toher, could be wrong. Still less could he have believed that he ought tomarry.
Marriage had never presented itself to him as a possibility. He not onlydisliked family life, but a family, and especially a husband was, inaccordance with the views general in the bachelor world in which helived, conceived as something alien, repellant, and, above all,ridiculous.
But though Vronsky had not the least suspicion what the parents weresaying, he felt on coming away from the Shtcherbatskys’ that the secretspiritual bond which existed between him and Kitty had grown so muchstronger that evening that some step must be taken. But what step couldand ought to be taken he could not imagine.
"What is so exquisite," he thought, as he returned from theShtcherbatskys’, carrying away with him, as he always did, a deliciousfeeling of purity and freshness, arising partly from the fact that hehad not been smoking for a whole evening, and with it a new feeling oftenderness at her love for him—"what is so exquisite is that not a wordhas been said by me or by her, but we understand each other so well inthis unseen language of looks and tones, that this evening more clearlythan ever she told me she loves me. And how secretly, simply, and mostof all, how trustfully! I feel myself better, purer. I feel that I havea heart, and that there is a great deal of good in me. Those sweet,loving eyes! When she said: ‘Indeed I do...’
"Well, what then? Oh, nothing. It’s good for me, and good for her." Andhe began wondering where to finish the evening.
He passed in review of the places he might go to. "Club? a game ofbezique, champagne with Ignatov? No, I’m not going. _Château desFleurs_; there I shall find Oblonsky, songs, the cancan. No, I’m sick ofit. That’s why I like the Shtcherbatskys’, that I’m growing better. I’llgo home." He went straight to his room at Dussot’s Hotel, orderedsupper, and then undressed, and as soon as his head touched the pillow,fell into a sound sleep.


Chapter 17

Next day at eleven o’clock in the morning Vronsky drove to the stationof the Petersburg railway to meet his mother, and the first person hecame across on the great flight of steps was Oblonsky, who was expectinghis sister by the same train.
"Ah! your excellency!" cried Oblonsky, "whom are you meeting?"
"My mother," Vronsky responded, smiling, as everyone did who metOblonsky. He shook hands with him, and together they ascended the steps."She is to be here from Petersburg today."
"I was looking out for you till two o’clock last night. Where did you goafter the Shtcherbatskys’?"
"Home," answered Vronsky. "I must own I felt so well content yesterdayafter the Shtcherbatskys’ that I didn’t care to go anywhere."
    "I know a gallant steed by tokens sure,    And by his eyes I know a youth in love,"
declaimed Stepan Arkadyevitch, just as he had done before to Levin.
Vronsky smiled with a look that seemed to say that he did not deny it,but he promptly changed the subject.
"And whom are you meeting?" he asked.
"I? I’ve come to meet a pretty woman," said Oblonsky.
"You don’t say so!"
"_Honi soit qui mal y pense!_ My sister Anna."
"Ah! that’s Madame Karenina," said Vronsky.
"You know her, no doubt?"
"I think I do. Or perhaps not ... I really am not sure," Vronskyanswered heedlessly, with a vague recollection of something stiff andtedious evoked by the name Karenina.
"But Alexey Alexandrovitch, my celebrated brother-in-law, you surelymust know. All the world knows him."
"I know him by reputation and by sight. I know that he’s clever,learned, religious somewhat.... But you know that’s not ... _not in myline,_" said Vronsky in English.
"Yes, he’s a very remarkable man; rather a conservative, but a splendidman," observed Stepan Arkadyevitch, "a splendid man."
"Oh, well, so much the better for him," said Vronsky smiling. "Oh,you’ve come," he said, addressing a tall old footman of his mother’s,standing at the door; "come here."
Besides the charm Oblonsky had in general for everyone, Vronsky had feltof late specially drawn to him by the fact that in his imagination hewas associated with Kitty.
"Well, what do you say? Shall we give a supper on Sunday for the_diva?_" he said to him with a smile, taking his arm.
"Of course. I’m collecting subscriptions. Oh, did you make theacquaintance of my friend Levin?" asked Stepan Arkadyevitch.
"Yes; but he left rather early."
"He’s a capital fellow," pursued Oblonsky. "Isn’t he?"
"I don’t know why it is," responded Vronsky, "in all Moscowpeople—present company of course excepted," he put in jestingly,"there’s something uncompromising. They are all on the defensive, losetheir tempers, as though they all want to make one feel something..."
"Yes, that’s true, it is so," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, laughinggood-humoredly.
"Will the train soon be in?" Vronsky asked a railway official.
"The train’s signaled," answered the man.
The approach of the train was more and more evident by the preparatorybustle in the station, the rush of porters, the movement of policemenand attendants, and people meeting the train. Through the frosty vaporcould be seen workmen in short sheepskins and soft felt boots crossingthe rails of the curving line. The hiss of the boiler could be heard onthe distant rails, and the rumble of something heavy.
"No," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, who felt a great inclination to tellVronsky of Levin’s intentions in regard to Kitty. "No, you’ve not got atrue impression of Levin. He’s a very nervous man, and is sometimes outof humor, it’s true, but then he is often very nice. He’s such a true,honest nature, and a heart of gold. But yesterday there were specialreasons," pursued Stepan Arkadyevitch, with a meaning smile, totallyoblivious of the genuine sympathy he had felt the day before for hisfriend, and feeling the same sympathy now, only for Vronsky. "Yes, therewere reasons why he could not help being either particularly happy orparticularly unhappy."
Vronsky stood still and asked directly: "How so? Do you mean he madeyour _belle-soeur_ an offer yesterday?"
"Maybe," said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "I fancied something of the sortyesterday. Yes, if he went away early, and was out of humor too, it mustmean it.... He’s been so long in love, and I’m very sorry for him."
"So that’s it! I should imagine, though, she might reckon on a bettermatch," said Vronsky, drawing himself up and walking about again,"though I don’t know him, of course," he added. "Yes, that is a hatefulposition! That’s why most fellows prefer to have to do with Klaras. Ifyou don’t succeed with them it only proves that you’ve not enough cash,but in this case one’s dignity’s at stake. But here’s the train."
The engine had already whistled in the distance. A few instants laterthe platform was quivering, and with puffs of steam hanging low in theair from the frost, the engine rolled up, with the lever of the middlewheel rhythmically moving up and down, and the stooping figure of theengine-driver covered with frost. Behind the tender, setting theplatform more and more slowly swaying, came the luggage van with a dogwhining in it. At last the passenger carriages rolled in, oscillatingbefore coming to a standstill.
A smart guard jumped out, giving a whistle, and after him one by one theimpatient passengers began to get down: an officer of the guards,holding himself erect, and looking severely about him; a nimble littlemerchant with a satchel, smiling gaily; a peasant with a sack over hisshoulder.
Vronsky, standing beside Oblonsky, watched the carriages and thepassengers, totally oblivious of his mother. What he had just heardabout Kitty excited and delighted him. Unconsciously he arched hischest, and his eyes flashed. He felt himself a conqueror.
"Countess Vronskaya is in that compartment," said the smart guard, goingup to Vronsky.
The guard’s words roused him, and forced him to think of his mother andhis approaching meeting with her. He did not in his heart respect hismother, and without acknowledging it to himself, he did not love her,though in accordance with the ideas of the set in which he lived, andwith his own education, he could not have conceived of any behavior tohis mother not in the highest degree respectful and obedient, and themore externally obedient and respectful his behavior, the less in hisheart he respected and loved her.


Chapter 18

Vronsky followed the guard to the carriage, and at the door of thecompartment he stopped short to make room for a lady who was gettingout.
With the insight of a man of the world, from one glance at this lady’sappearance Vronsky classified her as belonging to the best society. Hebegged pardon, and was getting into the carriage, but felt he mustglance at her once more; not that she was very beautiful, not on accountof the elegance and modest grace which were apparent in her wholefigure, but because in the expression of her charming face, as shepassed close by him, there was something peculiarly caressing and soft.As he looked round, she too turned her head. Her shining gray eyes, thatlooked dark from the thick lashes, rested with friendly attention on hisface, as though she were recognizing him, and then promptly turned awayto the passing crowd, as though seeking someone. In that brief lookVronsky had time to notice the suppressed eagerness which played overher face, and flitted between the brilliant eyes and the faint smilethat curved her red lips. It was as though her nature were so brimmingover with something that against her will it showed itself now in theflash of her eyes, and now in her smile. Deliberately she shrouded thelight in her eyes, but it shone against her will in the faintlyperceptible smile.
Vronsky stepped into the carriage. His mother, a dried-up old lady withblack eyes and ringlets, screwed up her eyes, scanning her son, andsmiled slightly with her thin lips. Getting up from the seat and handingher maid a bag, she gave her little wrinkled hand to her son to kiss,and lifting his head from her hand, kissed him on the cheek.
"You got my telegram? Quite well? Thank God."
"You had a good journey?" said her son, sitting down beside her, andinvoluntarily listening to a woman’s voice outside the door. He knew itwas the voice of the lady he had met at the door.
"All the same I don’t agree with you," said the lady’s voice.
"It’s the Petersburg view, madame."
"Not Petersburg, but simply feminine," she responded.
"Well, well, allow me to kiss your hand."
"Good-bye, Ivan Petrovitch. And could you see if my brother is here, andsend him to me?" said the lady in the doorway, and stepped back againinto the compartment.
"Well, have you found your brother?" said Countess Vronskaya, addressingthe lady.
Vronsky understood now that this was Madame Karenina.
"Your brother is here," he said, standing up. "Excuse me, I did not knowyou, and, indeed, our acquaintance was so slight," said Vronsky, bowing,"that no doubt you do not remember me."
"Oh, no," said she, "I should have known you because your mother and Ihave been talking, I think, of nothing but you all the way." As shespoke she let the eagerness that would insist on coming out show itselfin her smile. "And still no sign of my brother."
"Do call him, Alexey," said the old countess. Vronsky stepped out ontothe platform and shouted:
"Oblonsky! Here!"
Madame Karenina, however, did not wait for her brother, but catchingsight of him she stepped out with her light, resolute step. And as soonas her brother had reached her, with a gesture that struck Vronsky byits decision and its grace, she flung her left arm around his neck, drewhim rapidly to her, and kissed him warmly. Vronsky gazed, never takinghis eyes from her, and smiled, he could not have said why. Butrecollecting that his mother was waiting for him, he went back againinto the carriage.
"She’s very sweet, isn’t she?" said the countess of Madame Karenina."Her husband put her with me, and I was delighted to have her. We’vebeen talking all the way. And so you, I hear ... _vous filez le parfaitamour. Tant mieux, mon cher, tant mieux._"
"I don’t know what you are referring to, maman," he answered coldly."Come, maman, let us go."
Madame Karenina entered the carriage again to say good-bye to thecountess.
"Well, countess, you have met your son, and I my brother," she said."And all my gossip is exhausted. I should have nothing more to tellyou."
"Oh, no," said the countess, taking her hand. "I could go all around theworld with you and never be dull. You are one of those delightful womenin whose company it’s sweet to be silent as well as to talk. Now pleasedon’t fret over your son; you can’t expect never to be parted."
Madame Karenina stood quite still, holding herself very erect, and hereyes were smiling.
"Anna Arkadyevna," the countess said in explanation to her son, "has alittle son eight years old, I believe, and she has never been partedfrom him before, and she keeps fretting over leaving him."
"Yes, the countess and I have been talking all the time, I of my son andshe of hers," said Madame Karenina, and again a smile lighted up herface, a caressing smile intended for him.
"I am afraid that you must have been dreadfully bored," he said,promptly catching the ball of coquetry she had flung him. But apparentlyshe did not care to pursue the conversation in that strain, and sheturned to the old countess.
"Thank you so much. The time has passed so quickly. Good-bye, countess."
"Good-bye, my love," answered the countess. "Let me have a kiss of yourpretty face. I speak plainly, at my age, and I tell you simply that I’velost my heart to you."
Stereotyped as the phrase was, Madame Karenina obviously believed it andwas delighted by it. She flushed, bent down slightly, and put her cheekto the countess’s lips, drew herself up again, and with the same smilefluttering between her lips and her eyes, she gave her hand to Vronsky.He pressed the little hand she gave him, and was delighted, as though atsomething special, by the energetic squeeze with which she freely andvigorously shook his hand. She went out with the rapid step which boreher rather fully-developed figure with such strange lightness.
"Very charming," said the countess.
That was just what her son was thinking. His eyes followed her till hergraceful figure was out of sight, and then the smile remained on hisface. He saw out of the window how she went up to her brother, put herarm in his, and began telling him something eagerly, obviously somethingthat had nothing to do with him, Vronsky, and at that he felt annoyed.
"Well, maman, are you perfectly well?" he repeated, turning to hismother.
"Everything has been delightful. Alexander has been very good, and Mariehas grown very pretty. She’s very interesting."
And she began telling him again of what interested her most—thechristening of her grandson, for which she had been staying inPetersburg, and the special favor shown her elder son by the Tsar.
"Here’s Lavrenty," said Vronsky, looking out of the window; "now we cango, if you like."
The old butler who had traveled with the countess, came to the carriageto announce that everything was ready, and the countess got up to go.
"Come; there’s not such a crowd now," said Vronsky.
The maid took a handbag and the lap dog, the butler and a porter theother baggage. Vronsky gave his mother his arm; but just as they weregetting out of the carriage several men ran suddenly by withpanic-stricken faces. The station-master, too, ran by in hisextraordinary colored cap. Obviously something unusual had happened. Thecrowd who had left the train were running back again.
"What?... What?... Where?... Flung himself!... Crushed!..." was heardamong the crowd. Stepan Arkadyevitch, with his sister on his arm, turnedback. They too looked scared, and stopped at the carriage door to avoidthe crowd.
The ladies got in, while Vronsky and Stepan Arkadyevitch followed thecrowd to find out details of the disaster.
A guard, either drunk or too much muffled up in the bitter frost, hadnot heard the train moving back, and had been crushed.
Before Vronsky and Oblonsky came back the ladies heard the facts fromthe butler.
Oblonsky and Vronsky had both seen the mutilated corpse. Oblonsky wasevidently upset. He frowned and seemed ready to cry.
"Ah, how awful! Ah, Anna, if you had seen it! Ah, how awful!" he said.
Vronsky did not speak; his handsome face was serious, but perfectlycomposed.
"Oh, if you had seen it, countess," said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "And hiswife was there.... It was awful to see her!.... She flung herself on thebody. They say he was the only support of an immense family. How awful!"
"Couldn’t one do anything for her?" said Madame Karenina in an agitatedwhisper.
Vronsky glanced at her, and immediately got out of the carriage.
"I’ll be back directly, maman," he remarked, turning round in thedoorway.
When he came back a few minutes later, Stepan Arkadyevitch was alreadyin conversation with the countess about the new singer, while thecountess was impatiently looking towards the door, waiting for her son.
"Now let us be off," said Vronsky, coming in. They went out together.Vronsky was in front with his mother. Behind walked Madame Karenina withher brother. Just as they were going out of the station thestation-master overtook Vronsky.
"You gave my assistant two hundred roubles. Would you kindly explain forwhose benefit you intend them?"
"For the widow," said Vronsky, shrugging his shoulders. "I should havethought there was no need to ask."
"You gave that?" cried Oblonsky, behind, and, pressing his sister’shand, he added: "Very nice, very nice! Isn’t he a splendid fellow?Good-bye, countess."
And he and his sister stood still, looking for her maid.
When they went out the Vronsky’s carriage had already driven away.People coming in were still talking of what happened.
"What a horrible death!" said a gentleman, passing by. "They say he wascut in two pieces."
"On the contrary, I think it’s the easiest—instantaneous," observedanother.
"How is it they don’t take proper precautions?" said a third.
Madame Karenina seated herself in the carriage, and Stepan Arkadyevitchsaw with surprise that her lips were quivering, and she was withdifficulty restraining her tears.
"What is it, Anna?" he asked, when they had driven a few hundred yards.
"It’s an omen of evil," she said.
"What nonsense!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "You’ve come, that’s thechief thing. You can’t conceive how I’m resting my hopes on you."
"Have you known Vronsky long?" she asked.
"Yes. You know we’re hoping he will marry Kitty."
"Yes?" said Anna softly. "Come now, let us talk of you," she added,tossing her head, as though she would physically shake off somethingsuperfluous oppressing her. "Let us talk of your affairs. I got yourletter, and here I am."
"Yes, all my hopes are in you," said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
"Well, tell me all about it."
And Stepan Arkadyevitch began to tell his story.
On reaching home Oblonsky helped his sister out, sighed, pressed herhand, and set off to his office.


Chapter 19

When Anna went into the room, Dolly was sitting in the littledrawing-room with a white-headed fat little boy, already like hisfather, giving him a lesson in French reading. As the boy read, he kepttwisting and trying to tear off a button that was nearly off his jacket.His mother had several times taken his hand from it, but the fat littlehand went back to the button again. His mother pulled the button off andput it in her pocket.
"Keep your hands still, Grisha," she said, and she took up her work, acoverlet she had long been making. She always set to work on it atdepressed moments, and now she knitted at it nervously, twitching herfingers and counting the stitches. Though she had sent word the daybefore to her husband that it was nothing to her whether his sister cameor not, she had made everything ready for her arrival, and was expectingher sister-in-law with emotion.
Dolly was crushed by her sorrow, utterly swallowed up by it. Still shedid not forget that Anna, her sister-in-law, was the wife of one of themost important personages in Petersburg, and was a Petersburg _grandedame_. And, thanks to this circumstance, she did not carry out herthreat to her husband—that is to say, she remembered that hersister-in-law was coming. "And, after all, Anna is in no wise to blame,"thought Dolly. "I know nothing of her except the very best, and I haveseen nothing but kindness and affection from her towards myself." It wastrue that as far as she could recall her impressions at Petersburg atthe Karenins’, she did not like their household itself; there wassomething artificial in the whole framework of their family life. "Butwhy should I not receive her? If only she doesn’t take it into her headto console me!" thought Dolly. "All consolation and counsel andChristian forgiveness, all that I have thought over a thousand times,and it’s all no use."
All these days Dolly had been alone with her children. She did not wantto talk of her sorrow, but with that sorrow in her heart she could nottalk of outside matters. She knew that in one way or another she wouldtell Anna everything, and she was alternately glad at the thought ofspeaking freely, and angry at the necessity of speaking of herhumiliation with her, his sister, and of hearing her ready-made phrasesof good advice and comfort. She had been on the lookout for her,glancing at her watch every minute, and, as so often happens, let slipjust that minute when her visitor arrived, so that she did not hear thebell.
Catching a sound of skirts and light steps at the door, she lookedround, and her care-worn face unconsciously expressed not gladness, butwonder. She got up and embraced her sister-in-law.
"What, here already!" she said as she kissed her.
"Dolly, how glad I am to see you!"
"I am glad, too," said Dolly, faintly smiling, and trying by theexpression of Anna’s face to find out whether she knew. "Most likely sheknows," she thought, noticing the sympathy in Anna’s face. "Well, comealong, I’ll take you to your room," she went on, trying to defer as longas possible the moment of confidences.
"Is this Grisha? Heavens, how he’s grown!" said Anna; and kissing him,never taking her eyes off Dolly, she stood still and flushed a little."No, please, let us stay here."
She took off her kerchief and her hat, and catching it in a lock of herblack hair, which was a mass of curls, she tossed her head and shook herhair down.
"You are radiant with health and happiness!" said Dolly, almost withenvy.
"I?.... Yes," said Anna. "Merciful heavens, Tanya! You’re the same ageas my Seryozha," she added, addressing the little girl as she ran in.She took her in her arms and kissed her. "Delightful child, delightful!Show me them all."
She mentioned them, not only remembering the names, but the years,months, characters, illnesses of all the children, and Dolly could notbut appreciate that.
"Very well, we will go to them," she said. "It’s a pity Vassya’sasleep."
After seeing the children, they sat down, alone now, in the drawingroom, to coffee. Anna took the tray, and then pushed it away from her.
"Dolly," she said, "he has told me."
Dolly looked coldly at Anna; she was waiting now for phrases ofconventional sympathy, but Anna said nothing of the sort.
"Dolly, dear," she said, "I don’t want to speak for him to you, nor totry to comfort you; that’s impossible. But, darling, I’m simply sorry,sorry from my heart for you!"
Under the thick lashes of her shining eyes tears suddenly glittered. Shemoved nearer to her sister-in-law and took her hand in her vigorouslittle hand. Dolly did not shrink away, but her face did not lose itsfrigid expression. She said:
"To comfort me’s impossible. Everything’s lost after what has happened,everything’s over!"
And directly she had said this, her face suddenly softened. Anna liftedthe wasted, thin hand of Dolly, kissed it and said:
"But, Dolly, what’s to be done, what’s to be done? How is it best to actin this awful position—that’s what you must think of."
"All’s over, and there’s nothing more," said Dolly. "And the worst ofall is, you see, that I can’t cast him off: there are the children, I amtied. And I can’t live with him! it’s a torture to me to see him."
"Dolly, darling, he has spoken to me, but I want to hear it from you:tell me about it."
Dolly looked at her inquiringly.
Sympathy and love unfeigned were visible on Anna’s face.
"Very well," she said all at once. "But I will tell you it from thebeginning. You know how I was married. With the education mamma gave usI was more than innocent, I was stupid. I knew nothing. I know they saymen tell their wives of their former lives, but Stiva"—she correctedherself—"Stepan Arkadyevitch told me nothing. You’ll hardly believe it,but till now I imagined that I was the only woman he had known. So Ilived eight years. You must understand that I was so far from suspectinginfidelity, I regarded it as impossible, and then—try to imagine it—withsuch ideas, to find out suddenly all the horror, all theloathsomeness.... You must try and understand me. To be fully convincedof one’s happiness, and all at once..." continued Dolly, holding backher sobs, "to get a letter ... his letter to his mistress, my governess.No, it’s too awful!" She hastily pulled out her handkerchief and hid herface in it. "I can understand being carried away by feeling," she wenton after a brief silence, "but deliberately, slyly deceiving me ... andwith whom?... To go on being my husband together with her ... it’sawful! You can’t understand..."
"Oh, yes, I understand! I understand! Dolly, dearest, I do understand,"said Anna, pressing her hand.
"And do you imagine he realizes all the awfulness of my position?" Dollyresumed. "Not the slightest! He’s happy and contented."
"Oh, no!" Anna interposed quickly. "He’s to be pitied, he’s weighed downby remorse..."
"Is he capable of remorse?" Dolly interrupted, gazing intently into hersister-in-law’s face.
"Yes. I know him. I could not look at him without feeling sorry for him.We both know him. He’s good-hearted, but he’s proud, and now he’s sohumiliated. What touched me most..." (and here Anna guessed what wouldtouch Dolly most) "he’s tortured by two things: that he’s ashamed forthe children’s sake, and that, loving you—yes, yes, loving you beyondeverything on earth," she hurriedly interrupted Dolly, who would haveanswered—"he has hurt you, pierced you to the heart. ‘No, no, she cannotforgive me,’ he keeps saying."
Dolly looked dreamily away beyond her sister-in-law as she listened toher words.
"Yes, I can see that his position is awful; it’s worse for the guiltythan the innocent," she said, "if he feels that all the misery comesfrom his fault. But how am I to forgive him, how am I to be his wifeagain after her? For me to live with him now would be torture, justbecause I love my past love for him..."
And sobs cut short her words. But as though of set design, each time shewas softened she began to speak again of what exasperated her.
"She’s young, you see, she’s pretty," she went on. "Do you know, Anna,my youth and my beauty are gone, taken by whom? By him and his children.I have worked for him, and all I had has gone in his service, and now ofcourse any fresh, vulgar creature has more charm for him. No doubt theytalked of me together, or, worse still, they were silent. Do youunderstand?"
Again her eyes glowed with hatred.
"And after that he will tell me.... What! can I believe him? Never! No,everything is over, everything that once made my comfort, the reward ofmy work, and my sufferings.... Would you believe it, I was teachingGrisha just now: once this was a joy to me, now it is a torture. Whathave I to strive and toil for? Why are the children here? What’s soawful is that all at once my heart’s turned, and instead of love andtenderness, I have nothing but hatred for him; yes, hatred. I could killhim."
"Darling Dolly, I understand, but don’t torture yourself. You are sodistressed, so overwrought, that you look at many things mistakenly."
Dolly grew calmer, and for two minutes both were silent.
"What’s to be done? Think for me, Anna, help me. I have thought overeverything, and I see nothing."
Anna could think of nothing, but her heart responded instantly to eachword, to each change of expression of her sister-in-law.
"One thing I would say," began Anna. "I am his sister, I know hischaracter, that faculty of forgetting everything, everything" (she wavedher hand before her forehead), "that faculty for being completelycarried away, but for completely repenting too. He cannot believe it, hecannot comprehend now how he can have acted as he did."
"No; he understands, he understood!" Dolly broke in. "But I ... you areforgetting me ... does it make it easier for me?"
"Wait a minute. When he told me, I will own I did not realize all theawfulness of your position. I saw nothing but him, and that the familywas broken up. I felt sorry for him, but after talking to you, I see it,as a woman, quite differently. I see your agony, and I can’t tell youhow sorry I am for you! But, Dolly, darling, I fully realize yoursufferings, only there is one thing I don’t know; I don’t know ... Idon’t know how much love there is still in your heart for him. That youknow—whether there is enough for you to be able to forgive him. If thereis, forgive him!"
"No," Dolly was beginning, but Anna cut her short, kissing her hand oncemore.
"I know more of the world than you do," she said. "I know how men likeStiva look at it. You speak of his talking of you with her. That neverhappened. Such men are unfaithful, but their home and wife are sacred tothem. Somehow or other these women are still looked on with contempt bythem, and do not touch on their feeling for their family. They draw asort of line that can’t be crossed between them and their families. Idon’t understand it, but it is so."
"Yes, but he has kissed her..."
"Dolly, hush, darling. I saw Stiva when he was in love with you. Iremember the time when he came to me and cried, talking of you, and allthe poetry and loftiness of his feeling for you, and I know that thelonger he has lived with you the loftier you have been in his eyes. Youknow we have sometimes laughed at him for putting in at every word:‘Dolly’s a marvelous woman.’ You have always been a divinity for him,and you are that still, and this has not been an infidelity of theheart..."
"But if it is repeated?"
"It cannot be, as I understand it..."
"Yes, but could you forgive it?"
"I don’t know, I can’t judge.... Yes, I can," said Anna, thinking amoment; and grasping the position in her thought and weighing it in herinner balance, she added: "Yes, I can, I can, I can. Yes, I couldforgive it. I could not be the same, no; but I could forgive it, andforgive it as though it had never been, never been at all..."
"Oh, of course," Dolly interposed quickly, as though saying what she hadmore than once thought, "else it would not be forgiveness. If oneforgives, it must be completely, completely. Come, let us go; I’ll takeyou to your room," she said, getting up, and on the way she embracedAnna. "My dear, how glad I am you came. It has made things better, everso much better."


Chapter 20

The whole of that day Anna spent at home, that’s to say at theOblonskys’, and received no one, though some of her acquaintances hadalready heard of her arrival, and came to call the same day. Anna spentthe whole morning with Dolly and the children. She merely sent a briefnote to her brother to tell him that he must not fail to dine at home."Come, God is merciful," she wrote.
Oblonsky did dine at home: the conversation was general, and his wife,speaking to him, addressed him as "Stiva," as she had not done before.In the relations of the husband and wife the same estrangement stillremained, but there was no talk now of separation, and StepanArkadyevitch saw the possibility of explanation and reconciliation.
Immediately after dinner Kitty came in. She knew Anna Arkadyevna, butonly very slightly, and she came now to her sister’s with sometrepidation, at the prospect of meeting this fashionable Petersburglady, whom everyone spoke so highly of. But she made a favorableimpression on Anna Arkadyevna—she saw that at once. Anna wasunmistakably admiring her loveliness and her youth: before Kitty knewwhere she was she found herself not merely under Anna’s sway, but inlove with her, as young girls do fall in love with older and marriedwomen. Anna was not like a fashionable lady, nor the mother of a boy ofeight years old. In the elasticity of her movements, the freshness andthe unflagging eagerness which persisted in her face, and broke out inher smile and her glance, she would rather have passed for a girl oftwenty, had it not been for a serious and at times mournful look in hereyes, which struck and attracted Kitty. Kitty felt that Anna wasperfectly simple and was concealing nothing, but that she had anotherhigher world of interests inaccessible to her, complex and poetic.
After dinner, when Dolly went away to her own room, Anna rose quicklyand went up to her brother, who was just lighting a cigar.
"Stiva," she said to him, winking gaily, crossing him and glancingtowards the door, "go, and God help you."
He threw down the cigar, understanding her, and departed through thedoorway.
When Stepan Arkadyevitch had disappeared, she went back to the sofawhere she had been sitting, surrounded by the children. Either becausethe children saw that their mother was fond of this aunt, or that theyfelt a special charm in her themselves, the two elder ones, and theyounger following their lead, as children so often do, had clung abouttheir new aunt since before dinner, and would not leave her side. And ithad become a sort of game among them to sit a close as possible to theiraunt, to touch her, hold her little hand, kiss it, play with her ring,or even touch the flounce of her skirt.
"Come, come, as we were sitting before," said Anna Arkadyevna, sittingdown in her place.
And again Grisha poked his little face under her arm, and nestled withhis head on her gown, beaming with pride and happiness.
"And when is your next ball?" she asked Kitty.
"Next week, and a splendid ball. One of those balls where one alwaysenjoys oneself."
"Why, are there balls where one always enjoys oneself?" Anna said, withtender irony.
"It’s strange, but there are. At the Bobrishtchevs’ one always enjoysoneself, and at the Nikitins’ too, while at the Mezhkovs’ it’s alwaysdull. Haven’t you noticed it?"
"No, my dear, for me there are no balls now where one enjoys oneself,"said Anna, and Kitty detected in her eyes that mysterious world whichwas not open to her. "For me there are some less dull and tiresome."
"How can _you_ be dull at a ball?"
"Why should not _I_ be dull at a ball?" inquired Anna.
Kitty perceived that Anna knew what answer would follow.
"Because you always look nicer than anyone."
Anna had the faculty of blushing. She blushed a little, and said:
"In the first place it’s never so; and secondly, if it were, whatdifference would it make to me?"
"Are you coming to this ball?" asked Kitty.
"I imagine it won’t be possible to avoid going. Here, take it," she saidto Tanya, who was pulling the loosely-fitting ring off her white,slender-tipped finger.
"I shall be so glad if you go. I should so like to see you at a ball."
"Anyway, if I do go, I shall comfort myself with the thought that it’s apleasure to you ... Grisha, don’t pull my hair. It’s untidy enoughwithout that," she said, putting up a straying lock, which Grisha hadbeen playing with.
"I imagine you at the ball in lilac."
"And why in lilac precisely?" asked Anna, smiling. "Now, children, runalong, run along. Do you hear? Miss Hoole is calling you to tea," shesaid, tearing the children from her, and sending them off to the diningroom.
"I know why you press me to come to the ball. You expect a great deal ofthis ball, and you want everyone to be there to take part in it."
"How do you know? Yes."
"Oh! what a happy time you are at," pursued Anna. "I remember, and Iknow that blue haze like the mist on the mountains in Switzerland. Thatmist which covers everything in that blissful time when childhood isjust ending, and out of that vast circle, happy and gay, there is a pathgrowing narrower and narrower, and it is delightful and alarming toenter the ballroom, bright and splendid as it is.... Who has not beenthrough it?"
Kitty smiled without speaking. "But how did she go through it? How Ishould like to know all her love story!" thought Kitty, recalling theunromantic appearance of Alexey Alexandrovitch, her husband.
"I know something. Stiva told me, and I congratulate you. I liked him somuch," Anna continued. "I met Vronsky at the railway station."
"Oh, was he there?" asked Kitty, blushing. "What was it Stiva told you?"
"Stiva gossiped about it all. And I should be so glad ... I traveledyesterday with Vronsky’s mother," she went on; "and his mother talkedwithout a pause of him, he’s her favorite. I know mothers are partial,but..."
"What did his mother tell you?"
"Oh, a great deal! And I know that he’s her favorite; still one can seehow chivalrous he is.... Well, for instance, she told me that he hadwanted to give up all his property to his brother, that he had donesomething extraordinary when he was quite a child, saved a woman out ofthe water. He’s a hero, in fact," said Anna, smiling and recollectingthe two hundred roubles he had given at the station.
But she did not tell Kitty about the two hundred roubles. For somereason it was disagreeable to her to think of it. She felt that therewas something that had to do with her in it, and something that oughtnot to have been.
"She pressed me very much to go and see her," Anna went on; "and I shallbe glad to go to see her tomorrow. Stiva is staying a long while inDolly’s room, thank God," Anna added, changing the subject, and gettingup, Kitty fancied, displeased with something.
"No, I’m first! No, I!" screamed the children, who had finished tea,running up to their Aunt Anna.
"All together," said Anna, and she ran laughing to meet them, andembraced and swung round all the throng of swarming children, shriekingwith delight.


Chapter 21

Dolly came out of her room to the tea of the grown-up people. StepanArkadyevitch did not come out. He must have left his wife’s room by theother door.
"I am afraid you’ll be cold upstairs," observed Dolly, addressing Anna;"I want to move you downstairs, and we shall be nearer."
"Oh, please, don’t trouble about me," answered Anna, looking intentlyinto Dolly’s face, trying to make out whether there had been areconciliation or not.
"It will be lighter for you here," answered her sister-in-law.
"I assure you that I sleep everywhere, and always like a marmot."
"What’s the question?" inquired Stepan Arkadyevitch, coming out of hisroom and addressing his wife.
From his tone both Kitty and Anna knew that a reconciliation had takenplace.
"I want to move Anna downstairs, but we must hang up blinds. No oneknows how to do it; I must see to it myself," answered Dolly addressinghim.
"God knows whether they are fully reconciled," thought Anna, hearing hertone, cold and composed.
"Oh, nonsense, Dolly, always making difficulties," answered her husband."Come, I’ll do it all, if you like..."
"Yes, they must be reconciled," thought Anna.
"I know how you do everything," answered Dolly. "You tell Matvey to dowhat can’t be done, and go away yourself, leaving him to make a muddleof everything," and her habitual, mocking smile curved the corners ofDolly’s lips as she spoke.
"Full, full reconciliation, full," thought Anna; "thank God!" andrejoicing that she was the cause of it, she went up to Dolly and kissedher.
"Not at all. Why do you always look down on me and Matvey?" said StepanArkadyevitch, smiling hardly perceptibly, and addressing his wife.
The whole evening Dolly was, as always, a little mocking in her tone toher husband, while Stepan Arkadyevitch was happy and cheerful, but notso as to seem as though, having been forgiven, he had forgotten hisoffense.
At half-past nine o’clock a particularly joyful and pleasant familyconversation over the tea-table at the Oblonskys’ was broken up by anapparently simple incident. But this simple incident for some reasonstruck everyone as strange. Talking about common acquaintances inPetersburg, Anna got up quickly.
"She is in my album," she said; "and, by the way, I’ll show you mySeryozha," she added, with a mother’s smile of pride.
Towards ten o’clock, when she usually said good-night to her son, andoften before going to a ball put him to bed herself, she felt depressedat being so far from him; and whatever she was talking about, she keptcoming back in thought to her curly-headed Seryozha. She longed to lookat his photograph and talk of him. Seizing the first pretext, she gotup, and with her light, resolute step went for her album. The stairs upto her room came out on the landing of the great warm main staircase.
Just as she was leaving the drawing room, a ring was heard in the hall.
"Who can that be?" said Dolly.
"It’s early for me to be fetched, and for anyone else it’s late,"observed Kitty.
"Sure to be someone with papers for me," put in Stepan Arkadyevitch.When Anna was passing the top of the staircase, a servant was running upto announce the visitor, while the visitor himself was standing under alamp. Anna glancing down at once recognized Vronsky, and a strangefeeling of pleasure and at the same time of dread of something stirredin her heart. He was standing still, not taking off his coat, pullingsomething out of his pocket. At the instant when she was just facing thestairs, he raised his eyes, caught sight of her, and into the expressionof his face there passed a shade of embarrassment and dismay. With aslight inclination of her head she passed, hearing behind her StepanArkadyevitch’s loud voice calling him to come up, and the quiet, soft,and composed voice of Vronsky refusing.
When Anna returned with the album, he was already gone, and StepanArkadyevitch was telling them that he had called to inquire about thedinner they were giving next day to a celebrity who had just arrived."And nothing would induce him to come up. What a queer fellow he is!"added Stepan Arkadyevitch.
Kitty blushed. She thought that she was the only person who knew why hehad come, and why he would not come up. "He has been at home," shethought, "and didn’t find me, and thought I should be here, but he didnot come up because he thought it late, and Anna’s here."
All of them looked at each other, saying nothing, and began to look atAnna’s album.
There was nothing either exceptional or strange in a man’s calling athalf-past nine on a friend to inquire details of a proposed dinner partyand not coming in, but it seemed strange to all of them. Above all, itseemed strange and not right to Anna.


Chapter 22

The ball was only just beginning as Kitty and her mother walked up thegreat staircase, flooded with light, and lined with flowers and footmenin powder and red coats. From the rooms came a constant, steady hum, asfrom a hive, and the rustle of movement; and while on the landingbetween trees they gave last touches to their hair and dresses beforethe mirror, they heard from the ballroom the careful, distinct notes ofthe fiddles of the orchestra beginning the first waltz. A little old manin civilian dress, arranging his gray curls before another mirror, anddiffusing an odor of scent, stumbled against them on the stairs, andstood aside, evidently admiring Kitty, whom he did not know. A beardlessyouth, one of those society youths whom the old Prince Shtcherbatskycalled "young bucks," in an exceedingly open waistcoat, straighteninghis white tie as he went, bowed to them, and after running by, came backto ask Kitty for a quadrille. As the first quadrille had already beengiven to Vronsky, she had to promise this youth the second. An officer,buttoning his glove, stood aside in the doorway, and stroking hismustache, admired rosy Kitty.
Although her dress, her coiffure, and all the preparations for the ballhad cost Kitty great trouble and consideration, at this moment shewalked into the ballroom in her elaborate tulle dress over a pink slipas easily and simply as though all the rosettes and lace, all the minutedetails of her attire, had not cost her or her family a moment’sattention, as though she had been born in that tulle and lace, with herhair done up high on her head, and a rose and two leaves on the top ofit.
When, just before entering the ballroom, the princess, her mother, triedto turn right side out of the ribbon of her sash, Kitty had drawn back alittle. She felt that everything must be right of itself, and graceful,and nothing could need setting straight.
It was one of Kitty’s best days. Her dress was not uncomfortableanywhere; her lace berthe did not droop anywhere; her rosettes were notcrushed nor torn off; her pink slippers with high, hollowed-out heelsdid not pinch, but gladdened her feet; and the thick rolls of fairchignon kept up on her head as if they were her own hair. All the threebuttons buttoned up without tearing on the long glove that covered herhand without concealing its lines. The black velvet of her locketnestled with special softness round her neck. That velvet was delicious;at home, looking at her neck in the looking glass, Kitty had felt thatthat velvet was speaking. About all the rest there might be a doubt, butthe velvet was delicious. Kitty smiled here too, at the ball, when sheglanced at it in the glass. Her bare shoulders and arms gave Kitty asense of chill marble, a feeling she particularly liked. Her eyessparkled, and her rosy lips could not keep from smiling from theconsciousness of her own attractiveness. She had scarcely entered theballroom and reached the throng of ladies, all tulle, ribbons, lace, andflowers, waiting to be asked to dance—Kitty was never one of thatthrong—when she was asked for a waltz, and asked by the best partner,the first star in the hierarchy of the ballroom, a renowned director ofdances, a married man, handsome and well-built, Yegorushka Korsunsky. Hehad only just left the Countess Bonina, with whom he had danced thefirst half of the waltz, and, scanning his kingdom—that is to say, a fewcouples who had started dancing—he caught sight of Kitty, entering, andflew up to her with that peculiar, easy amble which is confined todirectors of balls. Without even asking her if she cared to dance, heput out his arm to encircle her slender waist. She looked round forsomeone to give her fan to, and their hostess, smiling to her, took it.
"How nice you’ve come in good time," he said to her, embracing herwaist; "such a bad habit to be late." Bending her left hand, she laid iton his shoulder, and her little feet in their pink slippers beganswiftly, lightly, and rhythmically moving over the slippery floor intime to the music.
"It’s a rest to waltz with you," he said to her, as they fell into thefirst slow steps of the waltz. "It’s exquisite—such lightness,precision." He said to her the same thing he said to almost all hispartners whom he knew well.
She smiled at his praise, and continued to look about the room over hisshoulder. She was not like a girl at her first ball, for whom all facesin the ballroom melt into one vision of fairyland. And she was not agirl who had gone the stale round of balls till every face in theballroom was familiar and tiresome. But she was in the middle stagebetween these two; she was excited, and at the same time she hadsufficient self-possession to be able to observe. In the left corner ofthe ballroom she saw the cream of society gathered together.There—incredibly naked—was the beauty Lidi, Korsunsky’s wife; there wasthe lady of the house; there shone the bald head of Krivin, always to befound where the best people were. In that direction gazed the young men,not venturing to approach. There, too, she descried Stiva, and there shesaw the exquisite figure and head of Anna in a black velvet gown. And_he_ was there. Kitty had not seen him since the evening she refusedLevin. With her long-sighted eyes, she knew him at once, and was evenaware that he was looking at her.
"Another turn, eh? You’re not tired?" said Korsunsky, a little out ofbreath.
"No, thank you!"
"Where shall I take you?"
"Madame Karenina’s here, I think ... take me to her."
"Wherever you command."
And Korsunsky began waltzing with measured steps straight towards thegroup in the left corner, continually saying, "Pardon, mesdames, pardon,pardon, mesdames"; and steering his course through the sea of lace,tulle, and ribbon, and not disarranging a feather, he turned his partnersharply round, so that her slim ankles, in light transparent stockings,were exposed to view, and her train floated out in fan shape and coveredKrivin’s knees. Korsunsky bowed, set straight his open shirt front, andgave her his arm to conduct her to Anna Arkadyevna. Kitty, flushed, tookher train from Krivin’s knees, and, a little giddy, looked round,seeking Anna. Anna was not in lilac, as Kitty had so urgently wished,but in a black, low-cut, velvet gown, showing her full throat andshoulders, that looked as though carved in old ivory, and her roundedarms, with tiny, slender wrists. The whole gown was trimmed withVenetian guipure. On her head, among her black hair—her own, with nofalse additions—was a little wreath of pansies, and a bouquet of thesame in the black ribbon of her sash among white lace. Her coiffure wasnot striking. All that was noticeable was the little wilful tendrils ofher curly hair that would always break free about her neck and temples.Round her well-cut, strong neck was a thread of pearls.
Kitty had been seeing Anna every day; she adored her, and had picturedher invariably in lilac. But now seeing her in black, she felt that shehad not fully seen her charm. She saw her now as someone quite new andsurprising to her. Now she understood that Anna could not have been inlilac, and that her charm was just that she always stood out against herattire, that her dress could never be noticeable on her. And her blackdress, with its sumptuous lace, was not noticeable on her; it was onlythe frame, and all that was seen was she—simple, natural, elegant, andat the same time gay and eager.
She was standing holding herself, as always, very erect, and when Kittydrew near the group she was speaking to the master of the house, herhead slightly turned towards him.
"No, I don’t throw stones," she was saying, in answer to something,"though I can’t understand it," she went on, shrugging her shoulders,and she turned at once with a soft smile of protection towards Kitty.With a flying, feminine glance she scanned her attire, and made amovement of her head, hardly perceptible, but understood by Kitty,signifying approval of her dress and her looks. "You came into the roomdancing," she added.
"This is one of my most faithful supporters," said Korsunsky, bowing toAnna Arkadyevna, whom he had not yet seen. "The princess helps to makeballs happy and successful. Anna Arkadyevna, a waltz?" he said, bendingdown to her.
"Why, have you met?" inquired their host.
"Is there anyone we have not met? My wife and I are like whitewolves—everyone knows us," answered Korsunsky. "A waltz, AnnaArkadyevna?"
"I don’t dance when it’s possible not to dance," she said.
"But tonight it’s impossible," answered Korsunsky.
At that instant Vronsky came up.
"Well, since it’s impossible tonight, let us start," she said, notnoticing Vronsky’s bow, and she hastily put her hand on Korsunsky’sshoulder.
"What is she vexed with him about?" thought Kitty, discerning that Annahad intentionally not responded to Vronsky’s bow. Vronsky went up toKitty reminding her of the first quadrille, and expressing his regretthat he had not seen her all this time. Kitty gazed in admiration atAnna waltzing, and listened to him. She expected him to ask her for awaltz, but he did not, and she glanced wonderingly at him. He flushedslightly, and hurriedly asked her to waltz, but he had only just put hisarm round her waist and taken the first step when the music suddenlystopped. Kitty looked into his face, which was so close to her own, andlong afterwards—for several years after—that look, full of love, towhich he made no response, cut her to the heart with an agony of shame.
"_Pardon! pardon!_ Waltz! waltz!" shouted Korsunsky from the other sideof the room, and seizing the first young lady he came across he begandancing himself.


Chapter 23

Vronsky and Kitty waltzed several times round the room. After the firstwaltz Kitty went to her mother, and she had hardly time to say a fewwords to Countess Nordston when Vronsky came up again for the firstquadrille. During the quadrille nothing of any significance was said:there was disjointed talk between them of the Korsunskys, husband andwife, whom he described very amusingly, as delightful children at forty,and of the future town theater; and only once the conversation touchedher to the quick, when he asked her about Levin, whether he was here,and added that he liked him so much. But Kitty did not expect much fromthe quadrille. She looked forward with a thrill at her heart to themazurka. She fancied that in the mazurka everything must be decided. Thefact that he did not during the quadrille ask her for the mazurka didnot trouble her. She felt sure she would dance the mazurka with him asshe had done at former balls, and refused five young men, saying she wasengaged for the mazurka. The whole ball up to the last quadrille was forKitty an enchanted vision of delightful colors, sounds, and motions. Sheonly sat down when she felt too tired and begged for a rest. But as shewas dancing the last quadrille with one of the tiresome young men whomshe could not refuse, she chanced to be vis-a-vis with Vronsky and Anna.She had not been near Anna again since the beginning of the evening, andnow again she saw her suddenly quite new and surprising. She saw in herthe signs of that excitement of success she knew so well in herself; shesaw that she was intoxicated with the delighted admiration she wasexciting. She knew that feeling and knew its signs, and saw them inAnna; saw the quivering, flashing light in her eyes, and the smile ofhappiness and excitement unconsciously playing on her lips, and thedeliberate grace, precision, and lightness of her movements.
"Who?" she asked herself. "All or one?" And not assisting the harassedyoung man she was dancing with in the conversation, the thread of whichhe had lost and could not pick up again, she obeyed with externalliveliness the peremptory shouts of Korsunsky starting them all into the_grand rond_, and then into the _châine_, and at the same time she keptwatch with a growing pang at her heart. "No, it’s not the admiration ofthe crowd has intoxicated her, but the adoration of one. And that one?can it be he?" Every time he spoke to Anna the joyous light flashed intoher eyes, and the smile of happiness curved her red lips. she seemed tomake an effort to control herself, to try not to show these signs ofdelight, but they came out on her face of themselves. "But what of him?"Kitty looked at him and was filled with terror. What was pictured soclearly to Kitty in the mirror of Anna’s face she saw in him. What hadbecome of his always self-possessed resolute manner, and the carelesslyserene expression of his face? Now every time he turned to her, he benthis head, as though he would have fallen at her feet, and in his eyesthere was nothing but humble submission and dread. "I would not offendyou," his eyes seemed every time to be saying, "but I want to savemyself, and I don’t know how." On his face was a look such as Kitty hadnever seen before.
They were speaking of common acquaintances, keeping up the most trivialconversation, but to Kitty it seemed that every word they said wasdetermining their fate and hers. And strange it was that they wereactually talking of how absurd Ivan Ivanovitch was with his French, andhow the Eletsky girl might have made a better match, yet these words hadall the while consequence for them, and they were feeling just as Kittydid. The whole ball, the whole world, everything seemed lost in fog inKitty’s soul. Nothing but the stern discipline of her bringing-upsupported her and forced her to do what was expected of her, that is, todance, to answer questions, to talk, even to smile. But before themazurka, when they were beginning to rearrange the chairs and a fewcouples moved out of the smaller rooms into the big room, a moment ofdespair and horror came for Kitty. She had refused five partners, andnow she was not dancing the mazurka. She had not even a hope of beingasked for it, because she was so successful in society that the ideawould never occur to anyone that she had remained disengaged till now.She would have to tell her mother she felt ill and go home, but she hadnot the strength to do this. She felt crushed. She went to the furthestend of the little drawing room and sank into a low chair. Her light,transparent skirts rose like a cloud about her slender waist; one bare,thin, soft, girlish arm, hanging listlessly, was lost in the folds ofher pink tunic; in the other she held her fan, and with rapid, shortstrokes fanned her burning face. But while she looked like a butterfly,clinging to a blade of grass, and just about to open its rainbow wingsfor fresh flight, her heart ached with a horrible despair.
"But perhaps I am wrong, perhaps it was not so?" And again she recalledall she had seen.
"Kitty, what is it?" said Countess Nordston, stepping noiselessly overthe carpet towards her. "I don’t understand it."
Kitty’s lower lip began to quiver; she got up quickly.
"Kitty, you’re not dancing the mazurka?"
"No, no," said Kitty in a voice shaking with tears.
"He asked her for the mazurka before me," said Countess Nordston,knowing Kitty would understand who were "he" and "her." "She said: ‘Why,aren’t you going to dance it with Princess Shtcherbatskaya?’"
"Oh, I don’t care!" answered Kitty.
No one but she herself understood her position; no one knew that she hadjust refused the man whom perhaps she loved, and refused him because shehad put her faith in another.
Countess Nordston found Korsunsky, with whom she was to dance themazurka, and told him to ask Kitty.
Kitty danced in the first couple, and luckily for her she had not totalk, because Korsunsky was all the time running about directing thefigure. Vronsky and Anna sat almost opposite her. She saw them with herlong-sighted eyes, and saw them, too, close by, when they met in thefigures, and the more she saw of them the more convinced was she thather unhappiness was complete. She saw that they felt themselves alone inthat crowded room. And on Vronsky’s face, always so firm andindependent, she saw that look that had struck her, of bewilderment andhumble submissiveness, like the expression of an intelligent dog when ithas done wrong.
Anna smiled, and her smile was reflected by him. She grew thoughtful,and he became serious. Some supernatural force drew Kitty’s eyes toAnna’s face. She was fascinating in her simple black dress, fascinatingwere her round arms with their bracelets, fascinating was her firm neckwith its thread of pearls, fascinating the straying curls of her loosehair, fascinating the graceful, light movements of her little feet andhands, fascinating was that lovely face in its eagerness, but there wassomething terrible and cruel in her fascination.
Kitty admired her more than ever, and more and more acute was hersuffering. Kitty felt overwhelmed, and her face showed it. When Vronskysaw her, coming across her in the mazurka, he did not at once recognizeher, she was so changed.
"Delightful ball!" he said to her, for the sake of saying something.
"Yes," she answered.
In the middle of the mazurka, repeating a complicated figure, newlyinvented by Korsunsky, Anna came forward into the center of the circle,chose two gentlemen, and summoned a lady and Kitty. Kitty gazed at herin dismay as she went up. Anna looked at her with drooping eyelids, andsmiled, pressing her hand. But, noticing that Kitty only responded toher smile by a look of despair and amazement, she turned away from her,and began gaily talking to the other lady.
"Yes, there is something uncanny, devilish and fascinating in her,"Kitty said to herself.
Anna did not mean to stay to supper, but the master of the house beganto press her to do so.
"Nonsense, Anna Arkadyevna," said Korsunsky, drawing her bare arm underthe sleeve of his dress coat, "I’ve such an idea for a _cotillion! Unbijou!_"
And he moved gradually on, trying to draw her along with him. Their hostsmiled approvingly.
"No, I am not going to stay," answered Anna, smiling, but in spite ofher smile, both Korsunsky and the master of the house saw from herresolute tone that she would not stay.
"No; why, as it is, I have danced more at your ball in Moscow than Ihave all the winter in Petersburg," said Anna, looking round at Vronsky,who stood near her. "I must rest a little before my journey."
"Are you certainly going tomorrow then?" asked Vronsky.
"Yes, I suppose so," answered Anna, as it were wondering at the boldnessof his question; but the irrepressible, quivering brilliance of her eyesand her smile set him on fire as she said it.
Anna Arkadyevna did not stay to supper, but went home.


Chapter 24

"Yes, there is something in me hateful, repulsive," thought Levin, as hecame away from the Shtcherbatskys’, and walked in the direction of hisbrother’s lodgings. "And I don’t get on with other people. Pride, theysay. No, I have no pride. If I had any pride, I should not have putmyself in such a position." And he pictured to himself Vronsky, happy,good-natured, clever, and self-possessed, certainly never placed in theawful position in which he had been that evening. "Yes, she was bound tochoose him. So it had to be, and I cannot complain of anyone oranything. I am myself to blame. What right had I to imagine she wouldcare to join her life to mine? Who am I and what am I? A nobody, notwanted by any one, nor of use to anybody." And he recalled his brotherNikolay, and dwelt with pleasure on the thought of him. "Isn’t he rightthat everything in the world is base and loathsome? And are we fair inour judgment of brother Nikolay? Of course, from the point of view ofProkofy, seeing him in a torn cloak and tipsy, he’s a despicable person.But I know him differently. I know his soul, and know that we are likehim. And I, instead of going to seek him out, went out to dinner, andcame here." Levin walked up to a lamppost, read his brother’s address,which was in his pocketbook, and called a sledge. All the long way tohis brother’s, Levin vividly recalled all the facts familiar to him ofhis brother Nikolay’s life. He remembered how his brother, while at theuniversity, and for a year afterwards, had, in spite of the jeers of hiscompanions, lived like a monk, strictly observing all religious rites,services, and fasts, and avoiding every sort of pleasure, especiallywomen. And afterwards, how he had all at once broken out: he hadassociated with the most horrible people, and rushed into the mostsenseless debauchery. He remembered later the scandal over a boy, whomhe had taken from the country to bring up, and, in a fit of rage, had soviolently beaten that proceedings were brought against him forunlawfully wounding. Then he recalled the scandal with a sharper, towhom he had lost money, and given a promissory note, and against whom hehad himself lodged a complaint, asserting that he had cheated him. (Thiswas the money Sergey Ivanovitch had paid.) Then he remembered how he hadspent a night in the lockup for disorderly conduct in the street. Heremembered the shameful proceedings he had tried to get up against hisbrother Sergey Ivanovitch, accusing him of not having paid him his shareof his mother’s fortune, and the last scandal, when he had gone to awestern province in an official capacity, and there had got into troublefor assaulting a village elder.... It was all horribly disgusting, yetto Levin it appeared not at all in the same disgusting light as itinevitably would to those who did not know Nikolay, did not know all hisstory, did not know his heart.
Levin remembered that when Nikolay had been in the devout stage, theperiod of fasts and monks and church services, when he was seeking inreligion a support and a curb for his passionate temperament, everyone,far from encouraging him, had jeered at him, and he, too, with theothers. They had teased him, called him Noah and Monk; and, when he hadbroken out, no one had helped him, but everyone had turned away from himwith horror and disgust.
Levin felt that, in spite of all the ugliness of his life, his brotherNikolay, in his soul, in the very depths of his soul, was no more in thewrong than the people who despised him. He was not to blame for havingbeen born with his unbridled temperament and his somehow limitedintelligence. But he had always wanted to be good. "I will tell himeverything, without reserve, and I will make him speak without reserve,too, and I’ll show him that I love him, and so understand him," Levinresolved to himself, as, towards eleven o’clock, he reached the hotel ofwhich he had the address.
"At the top, 12 and 13," the porter answered Levin’s inquiry.
"At home?"
"Sure to be at home."
The door of No. 12 was half open, and there came out into the streak oflight thick fumes of cheap, poor tobacco, and the sound of a voice,unknown to Levin; but he knew at once that his brother was there; heheard his cough.
As he went in the door, the unknown voice was saying:
"It all depends with how much judgment and knowledge the thing’s done."
Konstantin Levin looked in at the door, and saw that the speaker was ayoung man with an immense shock of hair, wearing a Russian jerkin, andthat a pockmarked woman in a woolen gown, without collar or cuffs, wassitting on the sofa. His brother was not to be seen. Konstantin felt asharp pang at his heart at the thought of the strange company in whichhis brother spent his life. No one had heard him, and Konstantin, takingoff his galoshes, listened to what the gentleman in the jerkin wassaying. He was speaking of some enterprise.
"Well, the devil flay them, the privileged classes," his brother’s voiceresponded, with a cough. "Masha! get us some supper and some wine ifthere’s any left; or else go and get some."
The woman rose, came out from behind the screen, and saw Konstantin.
"There’s some gentleman, Nikolay Dmitrievitch," she said.
"Whom do you want?" said the voice of Nikolay Levin, angrily.
"It’s I," answered Konstantin Levin, coming forward into the light.
"Who’s _I_?" Nikolay’s voice said again, still more angrily. He could beheard getting up hurriedly, stumbling against something, and Levin saw,facing him in the doorway, the big, scared eyes, and the huge, thin,stooping figure of his brother, so familiar, and yet astonishing in itsweirdness and sickliness.
He was even thinner than three years before, when Konstantin Levin hadseen him last. He was wearing a short coat, and his hands and big bonesseemed huger than ever. His hair had grown thinner, the same straightmustaches hid his lips, the same eyes gazed strangely and naively at hisvisitor.
"Ah, Kostya!" he exclaimed suddenly, recognizing his brother, and hiseyes lit up with joy. But the same second he looked round at the youngman, and gave the nervous jerk of his head and neck that Konstantin knewso well, as if his neckband hurt him; and a quite different expression,wild, suffering, and cruel, rested on his emaciated face.
"I wrote to you and Sergey Ivanovitch both that I don’t know you anddon’t want to know you. What is it you want?"
He was not at all the same as Konstantin had been fancying him. Theworst and most tiresome part of his character, what made all relationswith him so difficult, had been forgotten by Konstantin Levin when hethought of him, and now, when he saw his face, and especially thatnervous twitching of his head, he remembered it all.
"I didn’t want to see you for anything," he answered timidly. "I’vesimply come to see you."
His brother’s timidity obviously softened Nikolay. His lips twitched.
"Oh, so that’s it?" he said. "Well, come in; sit down. Like some supper?Masha, bring supper for three. No, stop a minute. Do you know who thisis?" he said, addressing his brother, and indicating the gentleman inthe jerkin: "This is Mr. Kritsky, my friend from Kiev, a very remarkableman. He’s persecuted by the police, of course, because he’s not ascoundrel."
And he looked round in the way he always did at everyone in the room.Seeing that the woman standing in the doorway was moving to go, heshouted to her, "Wait a minute, I said." And with the inability toexpress himself, the incoherence that Konstantin knew so well, he began,with another look round at everyone, to tell his brother Kritsky’sstory: how he had been expelled from the university for starting abenefit society for the poor students and Sunday schools; and how he hadafterwards been a teacher in a peasant school, and how he had beendriven out of that too, and had afterwards been condemned for something.
"You’re of the Kiev university?" said Konstantin Levin to Kritsky, tobreak the awkward silence that followed.
"Yes, I was of Kiev," Kritsky replied angrily, his face darkening.
"And this woman," Nikolay Levin interrupted him, pointing to her, "isthe partner of my life, Marya Nikolaevna. I took her out of a badhouse," and he jerked his neck saying this; "but I love her and respecther, and any one who wants to know me," he added, raising his voice andknitting his brows, "I beg to love her and respect her. She’s just thesame as my wife, just the same. So now you know whom you’ve to do with.And if you think you’re lowering yourself, well, here’s the floor,there’s the door."
And again his eyes traveled inquiringly over all of them.
"Why I should be lowering myself, I don’t understand."
"Then, Masha, tell them to bring supper; three portions, spirits andwine.... No, wait a minute.... No, it doesn’t matter.... Go along."


Chapter 25

"So you see," pursued Nikolay Levin, painfully wrinkling his foreheadand twitching.
It was obviously difficult for him to think of what to say and do.
"Here, do you see?"... He pointed to some sort of iron bars, fastenedtogether with strings, lying in a corner of the room. "Do you see that?That’s the beginning of a new thing we’re going into. It’s a productiveassociation..."
Konstantin scarcely heard him. He looked into his sickly, consumptiveface, and he was more and more sorry for him, and he could not forcehimself to listen to what his brother was telling him about theassociation. He saw that this association was a mere anchor to save himfrom self-contempt. Nikolay Levin went on talking:
"You know that capital oppresses the laborer. The laborers with us, thepeasants, bear all the burden of labor, and are so placed that howevermuch they work they can’t escape from their position of beasts ofburden. All the profits of labor, on which they might improve theirposition, and gain leisure for themselves, and after that education, allthe surplus values are taken from them by the capitalists. And society’sso constituted that the harder they work, the greater the profit of themerchants and landowners, while they stay beasts of burden to the end.And that state of things must be changed," he finished up, and he lookedquestioningly at his brother.
"Yes, of course," said Konstantin, looking at the patch of red that hadcome out on his brother’s projecting cheek bones.
"And so we’re founding a locksmiths’ association, where all theproduction and profit and the chief instruments of production will be incommon."
"Where is the association to be?" asked Konstantin Levin.
"In the village of Vozdrem, Kazan government."
"But why in a village? In the villages, I think, there is plenty of workas it is. Why a locksmiths’ association in a village?"
"Why? Because the peasants are just as much slaves as they ever were,and that’s why you and Sergey Ivanovitch don’t like people to try andget them out of their slavery," said Nikolay Levin, exasperated by theobjection.
Konstantin Levin sighed, looking meanwhile about the cheerless and dirtyroom. This sigh seemed to exasperate Nikolay still more.
"I know your and Sergey Ivanovitch’s aristocratic views. I know that heapplies all the power of his intellect to justify existing evils."
"No; and what do you talk of Sergey Ivanovitch for?" said Levin,smiling.
"Sergey Ivanovitch? I’ll tell you what for!" Nikolay Levin shriekedsuddenly at the name of Sergey Ivanovitch. "I’ll tell you what for....But what’s the use of talking? There’s only one thing.... What did youcome to me for? You look down on this, and you’re welcome to,—and goaway, in God’s name go away!" he shrieked, getting up from his chair."And go away, and go away!"
"I don’t look down on it at all," said Konstantin Levin timidly. "Idon’t even dispute it."
At that instant Marya Nikolaevna came back. Nikolay Levin looked roundangrily at her. She went quickly to him, and whispered something.
"I’m not well; I’ve grown irritable," said Nikolay Levin, getting calmerand breathing painfully; "and then you talk to me of Sergey Ivanovitchand his article. It’s such rubbish, such lying, such self-deception.What can a man write of justice who knows nothing of it? Have you readhis article?" he asked Kritsky, sitting down again at the table, andmoving back off half of it the scattered cigarettes, so as to clear aspace.
"I’ve not read it," Kritsky responded gloomily, obviously not desiringto enter into the conversation.
"Why not?" said Nikolay Levin, now turning with exasperation uponKritsky.
"Because I didn’t see the use of wasting my time over it."
"Oh, but excuse me, how did you know it would be wasting your time? Thatarticle’s too deep for many people—that’s to say it’s over their heads.But with me, it’s another thing; I see through his ideas, and I knowwhere its weakness lies."
Everyone was mute. Kritsky got up deliberately and reached his cap.
"Won’t you have supper? All right, good-bye! Come round tomorrow withthe locksmith."
Kritsky had hardly gone out when Nikolay Levin smiled and winked.
"He’s no good either," he said. "I see, of course..."
But at that instant Kritsky, at the door, called him...
"What do you want now?" he said, and went out to him in the passage.Left alone with Marya Nikolaevna, Levin turned to her.
"Have you been long with my brother?" he said to her.
"Yes, more than a year. Nikolay Dmitrievitch’s health has become verypoor. Nikolay Dmitrievitch drinks a great deal," she said.
"That is ... how does he drink?"
"Drinks vodka, and it’s bad for him."
"And a great deal?" whispered Levin.
"Yes," she said, looking timidly towards the doorway, where NikolayLevin had reappeared.
"What were you talking about?" he said, knitting his brows, and turninghis scared eyes from one to the other. "What was it?"
"Oh, nothing," Konstantin answered in confusion.
"Oh, if you don’t want to say, don’t. Only it’s no good your talking toher. She’s a wench, and you’re a gentleman," he said with a jerk of theneck. "You understand everything, I see, and have taken stock ofeverything, and look with commiseration on my shortcomings," he beganagain, raising his voice.
"Nikolay Dmitrievitch, Nikolay Dmitrievitch," whispered MaryaNikolaevna, again going up to him.
"Oh, very well, very well!... But where’s the supper? Ah, here it is,"he said, seeing a waiter with a tray. "Here, set it here," he addedangrily, and promptly seizing the vodka, he poured out a glassful anddrank it greedily. "Like a drink?" he turned to his brother, and at oncebecame better humored.
"Well, enough of Sergey Ivanovitch. I’m glad to see you, anyway. Afterall’s said and done, we’re not strangers. Come, have a drink. Tell mewhat you’re doing," he went on, greedily munching a piece of bread, andpouring out another glassful. "How are you living?"
"I live alone in the country, as I used to. I’m busy looking after theland," answered Konstantin, watching with horror the greediness withwhich his brother ate and drank, and trying to conceal that he noticedit.
"Why don’t you get married?"
"It hasn’t happened so," Konstantin answered, reddening a little.
"Why not? For me now ... everything’s at an end! I’ve made a mess of mylife. But this I’ve said, and I say still, that if my share had beengiven me when I needed it, my whole life would have been different."
Konstantin made haste to change the conversation.
"Do you know your little Vanya’s with me, a clerk in the countinghouseat Pokrovskoe."
Nikolay jerked his neck, and sank into thought.
"Yes, tell me what’s going on at Pokrovskoe. Is the house standingstill, and the birch trees, and our schoolroom? And Philip the gardener,is he living? How I remember the arbor and the seat! Now mind and don’talter anything in the house, but make haste and get married, and makeeverything as it used to be again. Then I’ll come and see you, if yourwife is nice."
"But come to me now," said Levin. "How nicely we would arrange it!"
"I’d come and see you if I were sure I should not find SergeyIvanovitch."
"You wouldn’t find him there. I live quite independently of him."
"Yes, but say what you like, you will have to choose between me andhim," he said, looking timidly into his brother’s face.
This timidity touched Konstantin.
"If you want to hear my confession of faith on the subject, I tell youthat in your quarrel with Sergey Ivanovitch I take neither side. You’reboth wrong. You’re more wrong externally, and he inwardly."
"Ah, ah! You see that, you see that!" Nikolay shouted joyfully.
"But I personally value friendly relations with you more because..."
"Why, why?"
Konstantin could not say that he valued it more because Nikolay wasunhappy, and needed affection. But Nikolay knew that this was just whathe meant to say, and scowling he took up the vodka again.
"Enough, Nikolay Dmitrievitch!" said Marya Nikolaevna, stretching outher plump, bare arm towards the decanter.
"Let it be! Don’t insist! I’ll beat you!" he shouted.
Marya Nikolaevna smiled a sweet and good-humored smile, which was atonce reflected on Nikolay’s face, and she took the bottle.
"And do you suppose she understands nothing?" said Nikolay. "Sheunderstands it all better than any of us. Isn’t it true there’ssomething good and sweet in her?"
"Were you never before in Moscow?" Konstantin said to her, for the sakeof saying something.
"Only you mustn’t be polite and stiff with her. It frightens her. No oneever spoke to her so but the justices of the peace who tried her fortrying to get out of a house of ill-fame. Mercy on us, the senselessnessin the world!" he cried suddenly. "These new institutions, thesejustices of the peace, rural councils, what hideousness it all is!"
And he began to enlarge on his encounters with the new institutions.
Konstantin Levin heard him, and the disbelief in the sense of all publicinstitutions, which he shared with him, and often expressed, wasdistasteful to him now from his brother’s lips.
"In another world we shall understand it all," he said lightly.
"In another world! Ah, I don’t like that other world! I don’t like it,"he said, letting his scared eyes rest on his brother’s eyes. "Here onewould think that to get out of all the baseness and the mess, one’s ownand other people’s, would be a good thing, and yet I’m afraid of death,awfully afraid of death." He shuddered. "But do drink something. Wouldyou like some champagne? Or shall we go somewhere? Let’s go to theGypsies! Do you know I have got so fond of the Gypsies and Russiansongs."
His speech had begun to falter, and he passed abruptly from one subjectto another. Konstantin with the help of Masha persuaded him not to goout anywhere, and got him to bed hopelessly drunk.
Masha promised to write to Konstantin in case of need, and to persuadeNikolay Levin to go and stay with his brother.


Chapter 26

In the morning Konstantin Levin left Moscow, and towards evening hereached home. On the journey in the train he talked to his neighborsabout politics and the new railways, and, just as in Moscow, he wasovercome by a sense of confusion of ideas, dissatisfaction with himself,shame of something or other. But when he got out at his own station,when he saw his one-eyed coachman, Ignat, with the collar of his coatturned up; when, in the dim light reflected by the station fires, he sawhis own sledge, his own horses with their tails tied up, in theirharness trimmed with rings and tassels; when the coachman Ignat, as heput in his luggage, told him the village news, that the contractor hadarrived, and that Pava had calved,—he felt that little by little theconfusion was clearing up, and the shame and self-dissatisfaction werepassing away. He felt this at the mere sight of Ignat and the horses;but when he had put on the sheepskin brought for him, had sat downwrapped up in the sledge, and had driven off pondering on the work thatlay before him in the village, and staring at the side-horse, that hadbeen his saddle-horse, past his prime now, but a spirited beast from theDon, he began to see what had happened to him in quite a differentlight. He felt himself, and did not want to be any one else. All hewanted now was to be better than before. In the first place he resolvedthat from that day he would give up hoping for any extraordinaryhappiness, such as marriage must have given him, and consequently hewould not so disdain what he really had. Secondly, he would never againlet himself give way to low passion, the memory of which had so torturedhim when he had been making up his mind to make an offer. Thenremembering his brother Nikolay, he resolved to himself that he wouldnever allow himself to forget him, that he would follow him up, and notlose sight of him, so as to be ready to help when things should go illwith him. And that would be soon, he felt. Then, too, his brother’s talkof communism, which he had treated so lightly at the time, now made himthink. He considered a revolution in economic conditions nonsense. Buthe always felt the injustice of his own abundance in comparison with thepoverty of the peasants, and now he determined that so as to feel quitein the right, though he had worked hard and lived by no meansluxuriously before, he would now work still harder, and would allowhimself even less luxury. And all this seemed to him so easy a conquestover himself that he spent the whole drive in the pleasantest daydreams.With a resolute feeling of hope in a new, better life, he reached homebefore nine o’clock at night.
The snow of the little quadrangle before the house was lit up by a lightin the bedroom windows of his old nurse, Agafea Mihalovna, who performedthe duties of housekeeper in his house. She was not yet asleep. Kouzma,waked up by her, came sidling sleepily out onto the steps. A setterbitch, Laska, ran out too, almost upsetting Kouzma, and whining, turnedround about Levin’s knees, jumping up and longing, but not daring, toput her forepaws on his chest.
"You’re soon back again, sir," said Agafea Mihalovna.
"I got tired of it, Agafea Mihalovna. With friends, one is well; but athome, one is better," he answered, and went into his study.
The study was slowly lit up as the candle was brought in. The familiardetails came out: the stag’s horns, the bookshelves, the looking-glass,the stove with its ventilator, which had long wanted mending, hisfather’s sofa, a large table, on the table an open book, a broken ashtray, a manuscript book with his handwriting. As he saw all this, therecame over him for an instant a doubt of the possibility of arranging thenew life, of which he had been dreaming on the road. All these traces ofhis life seemed to clutch him, and to say to him: "No, you’re not goingto get away from us, and you’re not going to be different, but you’regoing to be the same as you’ve always been; with doubts, everlastingdissatisfaction with yourself, vain efforts to amend, and falls, andeverlasting expectation, of a happiness which you won’t get, and whichisn’t possible for you."
This the things said to him, but another voice in his heart was tellinghim that he must not fall under the sway of the past, and that one cando anything with oneself. And hearing that voice, he went into thecorner where stood his two heavy dumbbells, and began brandishing themlike a gymnast, trying to restore his confident temper. There was acreak of steps at the door. He hastily put down the dumbbells.
The bailiff came in, and said everything, thank God, was doing well; butinformed him that the buckwheat in the new drying machine had been alittle scorched. This piece of news irritated Levin. The new dryingmachine had been constructed and partly invented by Levin. The bailiffhad always been against the drying machine, and now it was withsuppressed triumph that he announced that the buckwheat had beenscorched. Levin was firmly convinced that if the buckwheat had beenscorched, it was only because the precautions had not been taken, forwhich he had hundreds of times given orders. He was annoyed, andreprimanded the bailiff. But there had been an important and joyfulevent: Pava, his best cow, an expensive beast, bought at a show, hadcalved.
"Kouzma, give me my sheepskin. And you tell them to take a lantern. I’llcome and look at her," he said to the bailiff.
The cowhouse for the more valuable cows was just behind the house.Walking across the yard, passing a snowdrift by the lilac tree, he wentinto the cowhouse. There was the warm, steamy smell of dung when thefrozen door was opened, and the cows, astonished at the unfamiliar lightof the lantern, stirred on the fresh straw. He caught a glimpse of thebroad, smooth, black and piebald back of Hollandka. Berkoot, the bull,was lying down with his ring in his lip, and seemed about to get up, butthought better of it, and only gave two snorts as they passed by him.Pava, a perfect beauty, huge as a hippopotamus, with her back turned tothem, prevented their seeing the calf, as she sniffed her all over.
Levin went into the pen, looked Pava over, and lifted the red andspotted calf onto her long, tottering legs. Pava, uneasy, began lowing,but when Levin put the calf close to her she was soothed, and, sighingheavily, began licking her with her rough tongue. The calf, fumbling,poked her nose under her mother’s udder, and stiffened her tail outstraight.
"Here, bring the light, Fyodor, this way," said Levin, examining thecalf. "Like the mother! though the color takes after the father; butthat’s nothing. Very good. Long and broad in the haunch. VassilyFedorovitch, isn’t she splendid?" he said to the bailiff, quiteforgiving him for the buckwheat under the influence of his delight inthe calf.
"How could she fail to be? Oh, Semyon the contractor came the day afteryou left. You must settle with him, Konstantin Dmitrievitch," said thebailiff. "I did inform you about the machine."
This question was enough to take Levin back to all the details of hiswork on the estate, which was on a large scale, and complicated. He wentstraight from the cowhouse to the counting house, and after a littleconversation with the bailiff and Semyon the contractor, he went back tothe house and straight upstairs to the drawing room.


Chapter 27

The house was big and old-fashioned, and Levin, though he lived alone,had the whole house heated and used. He knew that this was stupid, heknew that it was positively not right, and contrary to his present newplans, but this house was a whole world to Levin. It was the world inwhich his father and mother had lived and died. They had lived just thelife that to Levin seemed the ideal of perfection, and that he haddreamed of beginning with his wife, his family.
Levin scarcely remembered his mother. His conception of her was for hima sacred memory, and his future wife was bound to be in his imaginationa repetition of that exquisite, holy ideal of a woman that his motherhad been.
He was so far from conceiving of love for woman apart from marriage thathe positively pictured to himself first the family, and only secondarilythe woman who would give him a family. His ideas of marriage were,consequently, quite unlike those of the great majority of hisacquaintances, for whom getting married was one of the numerous facts ofsocial life. For Levin it was the chief affair of life, on which itswhole happiness turned. And now he had to give up that.
When he had gone into the little drawing room, where he always had tea,and had settled himself in his armchair with a book, and AgafeaMihalovna had brought him tea, and with her usual, "Well, I’ll stay awhile, sir," had taken a chair in the window, he felt that, howeverstrange it might be, he had not parted from his daydreams, and that hecould not live without them. Whether with her, or with another, still itwould be. He was reading a book, and thinking of what he was reading,and stopping to listen to Agafea Mihalovna, who gossiped away withoutflagging, and yet with all that, all sorts of pictures of family lifeand work in the future rose disconnectedly before his imagination. Hefelt that in the depth of his soul something had been put in its place,settled down, and laid to rest.
He heard Agafea Mihalovna talking of how Prohor had forgotten his dutyto God, and with the money Levin had given him to buy a horse, had beendrinking without stopping, and had beaten his wife till he’d half killedher. He listened, and read his book, and recalled the whole train ofideas suggested by his reading. It was Tyndall’s _Treatise on Heat_. Herecalled his own criticisms of Tyndall of his complacent satisfaction inthe cleverness of his experiments, and for his lack of philosophicinsight. And suddenly there floated into his mind the joyful thought:"In two years’ time I shall have two Dutch cows; Pava herself willperhaps still be alive, a dozen young daughters of Berkoot and the threeothers—how lovely!"
He took up his book again. "Very good, electricity and heat are the samething; but is it possible to substitute the one quantity for the otherin the equation for the solution of any problem? No. Well, then what ofit? The connection between all the forces of nature is feltinstinctively.... It’s particulary nice if Pava’s daughter should be ared-spotted cow, and all the herd will take after her, and the otherthree, too! Splendid! To go out with my wife and visitors to meet theherd.... My wife says, ‘Kostya and I looked after that calf like achild.’ ‘How can it interest you so much?’ says a visitor. ‘Everythingthat interests him, interests me.’ But who will she be?" And heremembered what had happened at Moscow.... "Well, there’s nothing to bedone.... It’s not my fault. But now everything shall go on in a new way.It’s nonsense to pretend that life won’t let one, that the past won’tlet one. One must struggle to live better, much better."... He raisedhis head, and fell to dreaming. Old Laska, who had not yet fullydigested her delight at his return, and had run out into the yard tobark, came back wagging her tail, and crept up to him, bringing in thescent of fresh air, put her head under his hand, and whined plaintively,asking to be stroked.
"There, who’d have thought it?" said Agafea Mihalovna. "The dog now ...why, she understands that her master’s come home, and that he’slow-spirited."
"Why low-spirited?"
"Do you suppose I don’t see it, sir? It’s high time I should know thegentry. Why, I’ve grown up from a little thing with them. It’s nothing,sir, so long as there’s health and a clear conscience."
Levin looked intently at her, surprised at how well she knew histhought.
"Shall I fetch you another cup?" said she, and taking his cup she wentout.
Laska kept poking her head under his hand. He stroked her, and shepromptly curled up at his feet, laying her head on a hindpaw. And intoken of all now being well and satisfactory, she opened her mouth alittle, smacked her lips, and settling her sticky lips more comfortablyabout her old teeth, she sank into blissful repose. Levin watched allher movements attentively.
"That’s what I’ll do," he said to himself; "that’s what I’ll do!Nothing’s amiss.... All’s well."


Chapter 28

After the ball, early next morning, Anna Arkadyevna sent her husband atelegram that she was leaving Moscow the same day.
"No, I must go, I must go"; she explained to her sister-in-law thechange in her plans in a tone that suggested that she had to remember somany things that there was no enumerating them: "no, it had reallybetter be today!"
Stepan Arkadyevitch was not dining at home, but he promised to come andsee his sister off at seven o’clock.
Kitty, too, did not come, sending a note that she had a headache. Dollyand Anna dined alone with the children and the English governess.Whether it was that the children were fickle, or that they had acutesenses, and felt that Anna was quite different that day from what shehad been when they had taken such a fancy to her, that she was not nowinterested in them,—but they had abruptly dropped their play with theiraunt, and their love for her, and were quite indifferent that she wasgoing away. Anna was absorbed the whole morning in preparations for herdeparture. She wrote notes to her Moscow acquaintances, put down heraccounts, and packed. Altogether Dolly fancied she was not in a placidstate of mind, but in that worried mood, which Dolly knew well withherself, and which does not come without cause, and for the most partcovers dissatisfaction with self. After dinner, Anna went up to her roomto dress, and Dolly followed her.
"How queer you are today!" Dolly said to her.
"I? Do you think so? I’m not queer, but I’m nasty. I am like thatsometimes. I keep feeling as if I could cry. It’s very stupid, but it’llpass off," said Anna quickly, and she bent her flushed face over a tinybag in which she was packing a nightcap and some cambric handkerchiefs.Her eyes were particularly bright, and were continually swimming withtears. "In the same way I didn’t want to leave Petersburg, and now Idon’t want to go away from here."
"You came here and did a good deed," said Dolly, looking intently ather.
Anna looked at her with eyes wet with tears.
"Don’t say that, Dolly. I’ve done nothing, and could do nothing. I oftenwonder why people are all in league to spoil me. What have I done, andwhat could I do? In your heart there was found love enough toforgive..."
"If it had not been for you, God knows what would have happened! Howhappy you are, Anna!" said Dolly. "Everything is clear and good in yourheart."
"Every heart has its own _skeletons_, as the English say."
"You have no sort of _skeleton_, have you? Everything is so clear inyou."
"I have!" said Anna suddenly, and, unexpectedly after her tears, a sly,ironical smile curved her lips.
"Come, he’s amusing, anyway, your _skeleton_, and not depressing," saidDolly, smiling.
"No, he’s depressing. Do you know why I’m going today instead oftomorrow? It’s a confession that weighs on me; I want to make it toyou," said Anna, letting herself drop definitely into an armchair, andlooking straight into Dolly’s face.
And to her surprise Dolly saw that Anna was blushing up to her ears, upto the curly black ringlets on her neck.
"Yes," Anna went on. "Do you know why Kitty didn’t come to dinner? She’sjealous of me. I have spoiled ... I’ve been the cause of that ball beinga torture to her instead of a pleasure. But truly, truly, it’s not myfault, or only my fault a little bit," she said, daintily drawling thewords "a little bit."
"Oh, how like Stiva you said that!" said Dolly, laughing.
Anna was hurt.
"Oh no, oh no! I’m not Stiva," she said, knitting her brows. "That’s whyI’m telling you, just because I could never let myself doubt myself foran instant," said Anna.
But at the very moment she was uttering the words, she felt that theywere not true. She was not merely doubting herself, she felt emotion atthe thought of Vronsky, and was going away sooner than she had meant,simply to avoid meeting him.
"Yes, Stiva told me you danced the mazurka with him, and that he..."
"You can’t imagine how absurdly it all came about. I only meant to bematchmaking, and all at once it turned out quite differently. Possiblyagainst my own will..."
She crimsoned and stopped.
"Oh, they feel it directly?" said Dolly.
"But I should be in despair if there were anything serious in it on hisside," Anna interrupted her. "And I am certain it will all be forgotten,and Kitty will leave off hating me."
"All the same, Anna, to tell you the truth, I’m not very anxious forthis marriage for Kitty. And it’s better it should come to nothing, ifhe, Vronsky, is capable of falling in love with you in a single day."
"Oh, heavens, that would be too silly!" said Anna, and again a deepflush of pleasure came out on her face, when she heard the idea, thatabsorbed her, put into words. "And so here I am going away, having madean enemy of Kitty, whom I liked so much! Ah, how sweet she is! Butyou’ll make it right, Dolly? Eh?"
Dolly could scarcely suppress a smile. She loved Anna, but she enjoyedseeing that she too had her weaknesses.
"An enemy? That can’t be."
"I did so want you all to care for me, as I do for you, and now I carefor you more than ever," said Anna, with tears in her eyes. "Ah, howsilly I am today!"
She passed her handkerchief over her face and began dressing.
At the very moment of starting Stepan Arkadyevitch arrived, late, rosyand good-humored, smelling of wine and cigars.
Anna’s emotionalism infected Dolly, and when she embraced hersister-in-law for the last time, she whispered: "Remember, Anna, whatyou’ve done for me—I shall never forget. And remember that I love you,and shall always love you as my dearest friend!"
"I don’t know why," said Anna, kissing her and hiding her tears.
"You understood me, and you understand. Good-bye, my darling!"


Chapter 29

"Come, it’s all over, and thank God!" was the first thought that came toAnna Arkadyevna, when she had said good-bye for the last time to herbrother, who had stood blocking up the entrance to the carriage till thethird bell rang. She sat down on her lounge beside Annushka, and lookedabout her in the twilight of the sleeping-carriage. "Thank God! tomorrowI shall see Seryozha and Alexey Alexandrovitch, and my life will go onin the old way, all nice and as usual."
Still in the same anxious frame of mind, as she had been all that day,Anna took pleasure in arranging herself for the journey with great care.With her little deft hands she opened and shut her little red bag, tookout a cushion, laid it on her knees, and carefully wrapping up her feet,settled herself comfortably. An invalid lady had already lain down tosleep. Two other ladies began talking to Anna, and a stout elderly ladytucked up her feet, and made observations about the heating of thetrain. Anna answered a few words, but not foreseeing any entertainmentfrom the conversation, she asked Annushka to get a lamp, hooked it ontothe arm of her seat, and took from her bag a paper knife and an Englishnovel. At first her reading made no progress. The fuss and bustle weredisturbing; then when the train had started, she could not helplistening to the noises; then the snow beating on the left window andsticking to the pane, and the sight of the muffled guard passing by,covered with snow on one side, and the conversations about the terriblesnowstorm raging outside, distracted her attention. Farther on, it wascontinually the same again and again: the same shaking and rattling, thesame snow on the window, the same rapid transitions from steaming heatto cold, and back again to heat, the same passing glimpses of the samefigures in the twilight, and the same voices, and Anna began to read andto understand what she read. Annushka was already dozing, the red bag onher lap, clutched by her broad hands, in gloves, of which one was torn.Anna Arkadyevna read and understood, but it was distasteful to her toread, that is, to follow the reflection of other people’s lives. She hadtoo great a desire to live herself. If she read that the heroine of thenovel was nursing a sick man, she longed to move with noiseless stepsabout the room of a sick man; if she read of a member of Parliamentmaking a speech, she longed to be delivering the speech; if she read ofhow Lady Mary had ridden after the hounds, and had provoked hersister-in-law, and had surprised everyone by her boldness, she toowished to be doing the same. But there was no chance of doing anything;and twisting the smooth paper knife in her little hands, she forcedherself to read.
The hero of the novel was already almost reaching his English happiness,a baronetcy and an estate, and Anna was feeling a desire to go with himto the estate, when she suddenly felt that _he_ ought to feel ashamed,and that she was ashamed of the same thing. But what had he to beashamed of? "What have I to be ashamed of?" she asked herself in injuredsurprise. She laid down the book and sank against the back of the chair,tightly gripping the paper cutter in both hands. There was nothing. Shewent over all her Moscow recollections. All were good, pleasant. Sheremembered the ball, remembered Vronsky and his face of slavishadoration, remembered all her conduct with him: there was nothingshameful. And for all that, at the same point in her memories, thefeeling of shame was intensified, as though some inner voice, just atthe point when she thought of Vronsky, were saying to her, "Warm, verywarm, hot." "Well, what is it?" she said to herself resolutely, shiftingher seat in the lounge. "What does it mean? Am I afraid to look itstraight in the face? Why, what is it? Can it be that between me andthis officer boy there exist, or can exist, any other relations thansuch as are common with every acquaintance?" She laughed contemptuouslyand took up her book again; but now she was definitely unable to followwhat she read. She passed the paper knife over the window pane, thenlaid its smooth, cool surface to her cheek, and almost laughed aloud atthe feeling of delight that all at once without cause came over her. Shefelt as though her nerves were strings being strained tighter andtighter on some sort of screwing peg. She felt her eyes opening widerand wider, her fingers and toes twitching nervously, something withinoppressing her breathing, while all shapes and sounds seemed in theuncertain half-light to strike her with unaccustomed vividness. Momentsof doubt were continually coming upon her, when she was uncertainwhether the train were going forwards or backwards, or were standingstill altogether; whether it were Annushka at her side or a stranger."What’s that on the arm of the chair, a fur cloak or some beast? Andwhat am I myself? Myself or some other woman?" She was afraid of givingway to this delirium. But something drew her towards it, and she couldyield to it or resist it at will. She got up to rouse herself, andslipped off her plaid and the cape of her warm dress. For a moment sheregained her self-possession, and realized that the thin peasant who hadcome in wearing a long overcoat, with buttons missing from it, was thestoveheater, that he was looking at the thermometer, that it was thewind and snow bursting in after him at the door; but then everythinggrew blurred again.... That peasant with the long waist seemed to begnawing something on the wall, the old lady began stretching her legsthe whole length of the carriage, and filling it with a black cloud;then there was a fearful shrieking and banging, as though someone werebeing torn to pieces; then there was a blinding dazzle of red firebefore her eyes and a wall seemed to rise up and hide everything. Annafelt as though she were sinking down. But it was not terrible, butdelightful. The voice of a man muffled up and covered with snow shoutedsomething in her ear. She got up and pulled herself together; sherealized that they had reached a station and that this was the guard.She asked Annushka to hand her the cape she had taken off and her shawl,put them on and moved towards the door.
"Do you wish to get out?" asked Annushka.
"Yes, I want a little air. It’s very hot in here." And she opened thedoor. The driving snow and the wind rushed to meet her and struggledwith her over the door. But she enjoyed the struggle.
She opened the door and went out. The wind seemed as though lying inwait for her; with gleeful whistle it tried to snatch her up and bearher off, but she clung to the cold door post, and holding her skirt gotdown onto the platform and under the shelter of the carriages. The windhad been powerful on the steps, but on the platform, under the lee ofthe carriages, there was a lull. With enjoyment she drew deep breaths ofthe frozen, snowy air, and standing near the carriage looked about theplatform and the lighted station.


Chapter 30

The raging tempest rushed whistling between the wheels of the carriages,about the scaffolding, and round the corner of the station. Thecarriages, posts, people, everything that was to be seen was coveredwith snow on one side, and was getting more and more thickly covered.For a moment there would come a lull in the storm, but then it wouldswoop down again with such onslaughts that it seemed impossible to standagainst it. Meanwhile men ran to and fro, talking merrily together,their steps crackling on the platform as they continually opened andclosed the big doors. The bent shadow of a man glided by at her feet,and she heard sounds of a hammer upon iron. "Hand over that telegram!"came an angry voice out of the stormy darkness on the other side. "Thisway! No. 28!" several different voices shouted again, and muffledfigures ran by covered with snow. Two gentlemen with lighted cigarettespassed by her. She drew one more deep breath of the fresh air, and hadjust put her hand out of her muff to take hold of the door post and getback into the carriage, when another man in a military overcoat, quiteclose beside her, stepped between her and the flickering light of thelamp post. She looked round, and the same instant recognized Vronsky’sface. Putting his hand to the peak of his cap, he bowed to her andasked, Was there anything she wanted? Could he be of any service to her?She gazed rather a long while at him without answering, and, in spite ofthe shadow in which he was standing, she saw, or fancied she saw, boththe expression of his face and his eyes. It was again that expression ofreverential ecstasy which had so worked upon her the day before. Morethan once she had told herself during the past few days, and again onlya few moments before, that Vronsky was for her only one of the hundredsof young men, forever exactly the same, that are met everywhere, thatshe would never allow herself to bestow a thought upon him. But now atthe first instant of meeting him, she was seized by a feeling of joyfulpride. She had no need to ask why he had come. She knew as certainly asif he had told her that he was here to be where she was.
"I didn’t know you were going. What are you coming for?" she said,letting fall the hand with which she had grasped the door post. Andirrepressible delight and eagerness shone in her face.
"What am I coming for?" he repeated, looking straight into her eyes."You know that I have come to be where you are," he said; "I can’t helpit."
At that moment the wind, as it were, surmounting all obstacles, sent thesnow flying from the carriage roofs, and clanked some sheet of iron ithad torn off, while the hoarse whistle of the engine roared in front,plaintively and gloomily. All the awfulness of the storm seemed to hermore splendid now. He had said what her soul longed to hear, though shefeared it with her reason. She made no answer, and in her face he sawconflict.
"Forgive me, if you dislike what I said," he said humbly.
He had spoken courteously, deferentially, yet so firmly, so stubbornly,that for a long while she could make no answer.
"It’s wrong, what you say, and I beg you, if you’re a good man, toforget what you’ve said, as I forget it," she said at last.
"Not one word, not one gesture of yours shall I, could I, everforget..."
"Enough, enough!" she cried trying assiduously to give a sternexpression to her face, into which he was gazing greedily. And clutchingat the cold door post, she clambered up the steps and got rapidly intothe corridor of the carriage. But in the little corridor she paused,going over in her imagination what had happened. Though she could notrecall her own words or his, she realized instinctively that themomentary conversation had brought them fearfully closer; and she waspanic-stricken and blissful at it. After standing still a few seconds,she went into the carriage and sat down in her place. The overstrainedcondition which had tormented her before did not only come back, but wasintensified, and reached such a pitch that she was afraid every minutethat something would snap within her from the excessive tension. She didnot sleep all night. But in that nervous tension, and in the visionsthat filled her imagination, there was nothing disagreeable or gloomy:on the contrary there was something blissful, glowing, and exhilarating.Towards morning Anna sank into a doze, sitting in her place, and whenshe waked it was daylight and the train was near Petersburg. At oncethoughts of home, of husband and of son, and the details of that day andthe following came upon her.
At Petersburg, as soon as the train stopped and she got out, the firstperson that attracted her attention was her husband. "Oh, mercy! why dohis ears look like that?" she thought, looking at his frigid andimposing figure, and especially the ears that struck her at the momentas propping up the brim of his round hat. Catching sight of her, he cameto meet her, his lips falling into their habitual sarcastic smile, andhis big, tired eyes looking straight at her. An unpleasant sensationgripped at her heart when she met his obstinate and weary glance, asthough she had expected to see him different. She was especially struckby the feeling of dissatisfaction with herself that she experienced onmeeting him. That feeling was an intimate, familiar feeling, like aconsciousness of hypocrisy, which she experienced in her relations withher husband. But hitherto she had not taken note of the feeling, now shewas clearly and painfully aware of it.
"Yes, as you see, your tender spouse, as devoted as the first year aftermarriage, burned with impatience to see you," he said in his deliberate,high-pitched voice, and in that tone which he almost always took withher, a tone of jeering at anyone who should say in earnest what he said.
"Is Seryozha quite well?" she asked.
"And is this all the reward," said he, "for my ardor? He’s quitewell..."


Chapter 31

Vronsky had not even tried to sleep all that night. He sat in hisarmchair, looking straight before him or scanning the people who got inand out. If he had indeed on previous occasions struck and impressedpeople who did not know him by his air of unhesitating composure, heseemed now more haughty and self-possessed than ever. He looked atpeople as if they were things. A nervous young man, a clerk in a lawcourt, sitting opposite him, hated him for that look. The young manasked him for a light, and entered into conversation with him, and evenpushed against him, to make him feel that he was not a thing, but aperson. But Vronsky gazed at him exactly as he did at the lamp, and theyoung man made a wry face, feeling that he was losing hisself-possession under the oppression of this refusal to recognize him asa person.
Vronsky saw nothing and no one. He felt himself a king, not because hebelieved that he had made an impression on Anna—he did not yet believethat,—but because the impression she had made on him gave him happinessand pride.
What would come of it all he did not know, he did not even think. Hefelt that all his forces, hitherto dissipated, wasted, were centered onone thing, and bent with fearful energy on one blissful goal. And he washappy at it. He knew only that he had told her the truth, that he hadcome where she was, that all the happiness of his life, the only meaningin life for him, now lay in seeing and hearing her. And when he got outof the carriage at Bologova to get some seltzer water, and caught sightof Anna, involuntarily his first word had told her just what he thought.And he was glad he had told her it, that she knew it now and wasthinking of it. He did not sleep all night. When he was back in thecarriage, he kept unceasingly going over every position in which he hadseen her, every word she had uttered, and before his fancy, making hisheart faint with emotion, floated pictures of a possible future.
When he got out of the train at Petersburg, he felt after his sleeplessnight as keen and fresh as after a cold bath. He paused near hiscompartment, waiting for her to get out. "Once more," he said tohimself, smiling unconsciously, "once more I shall see her walk, herface; she will say something, turn her head, glance, smile, maybe." Butbefore he caught sight of her, he saw her husband, whom thestation-master was deferentially escorting through the crowd. "Ah, yes!The husband." Only now for the first time did Vronsky realize clearlythe fact that there was a person attached to her, a husband. He knewthat she had a husband, but had hardly believed in his existence, andonly now fully believed in him, with his head and shoulders, and hislegs clad in black trousers; especially when he saw this husband calmlytake her arm with a sense of property.
Seeing Alexey Alexandrovitch with his Petersburg face and severelyself-confident figure, in his round hat, with his rather prominentspine, he believed in him, and was aware of a disagreeable sensation,such as a man might feel tortured by thirst, who, on reaching a spring,should find a dog, a sheep, or a pig, who has drunk of it and muddiedthe water. Alexey Alexandrovitch’s manner of walking, with a swing ofthe hips and flat feet, particularly annoyed Vronsky. He could recognizein no one but himself an indubitable right to love her. But she wasstill the same, and the sight of her affected him the same way,physically reviving him, stirring him, and filling his soul withrapture. He told his German valet, who ran up to him from the secondclass, to take his things and go on, and he himself went up to her. Hesaw the first meeting between the husband and wife, and noted with alover’s insight the signs of slight reserve with which she spoke to herhusband. "No, she does not love him and cannot love him," he decided tohimself.
At the moment when he was approaching Anna Arkadyevna he noticed toowith joy that she was conscious of his being near, and looked round, andseeing him, turned again to her husband.
"Have you passed a good night?" he asked, bowing to her and her husbandtogether, and leaving it up to Alexey Alexandrovitch to accept the bowon his own account, and to recognize it or not, as he might see fit.
"Thank you, very good," she answered.
Her face looked weary, and there was not that play of eagerness in it,peeping out in her smile and her eyes; but for a single instant, as sheglanced at him, there was a flash of something in her eyes, and althoughthe flash died away at once, he was happy for that moment. She glancedat her husband to find out whether he knew Vronsky. AlexeyAlexandrovitch looked at Vronsky with displeasure, vaguely recalling whothis was. Vronsky’s composure and self-confidence here struck, like ascythe against a stone, upon the cold self-confidence of AlexeyAlexandrovitch.
"Count Vronsky," said Anna.
"Ah! We are acquainted, I believe," said Alexey Alexandrovitchindifferently, giving his hand.
"You set off with the mother and you return with the son," he said,articulating each syllable, as though each were a separate favor he wasbestowing.
"You’re back from leave, I suppose?" he said, and without waiting for areply, he turned to his wife in his jesting tone: "Well, were a greatmany tears shed at Moscow at parting?"
By addressing his wife like this he gave Vronsky to understand that hewished to be left alone, and, turning slightly towards him, he touchedhis hat; but Vronsky turned to Anna Arkadyevna.
"I hope I may have the honor of calling on you," he said.
Alexey Alexandrovitch glanced with his weary eyes at Vronsky.
"Delighted," he said coldly. "On Mondays we’re at home. Most fortunate,"he said to his wife, dismissing Vronsky altogether, "that I should justhave half an hour to meet you, so that I can prove my devotion," he wenton in the same jesting tone.
"You lay too much stress on your devotion for me to value it much," sheresponded in the same jesting tone, involuntarily listening to the soundof Vronsky’s steps behind them. "But what has it to do with me?" shesaid to herself, and she began asking her husband how Seryozha had goton without her.
"Oh, capitally! Mariette says he has been very good, And ... I mustdisappoint you ... but he has not missed you as your husband has. Butonce more _merci,_ my dear, for giving me a day. Our dear _Samovar_ willbe delighted." (He used to call the Countess Lidia Ivanovna, well knownin society, a samovar, because she was always bubbling over withexcitement.) "She has been continually asking after you. And, do youknow, if I may venture to advise you, you should go and see her today.You know how she takes everything to heart. Just now, with all her owncares, she’s anxious about the Oblonskys being brought together."
The Countess Lidia Ivanovna was a friend of her husband’s, and thecenter of that one of the coteries of the Petersburg world with whichAnna was, through her husband, in the closest relations.
"But you know I wrote to her?"
"Still she’ll want to hear details. Go and see her, if you’re not tootired, my dear. Well, Kondraty will take you in the carriage, while I goto my committee. I shall not be alone at dinner again," AlexeyAlexandrovitch went on, no longer in a sarcastic tone. "You wouldn’tbelieve how I’ve missed..." And with a long pressure of her hand and ameaning smile, he put her in her carriage.


Chapter 32

The first person to meet Anna at home was her son. He dashed down thestairs to her, in spite of the governess’s call, and with desperate joyshrieked: "Mother! mother!" Running up to her, he hung on her neck.
"I told you it was mother!" he shouted to the governess. "I knew!"
And her son, like her husband, aroused in Anna a feeling akin todisappointment. She had imagined him better than he was in reality. Shehad to let herself drop down to the reality to enjoy him as he reallywas. But even as he was, he was charming, with his fair curls, his blueeyes, and his plump, graceful little legs in tightly pulled-upstockings. Anna experienced almost physical pleasure in the sensation ofhis nearness, and his caresses, and moral soothing, when she met hissimple, confiding, and loving glance, and heard his naïve questions.Anna took out the presents Dolly’s children had sent him, and told herson what sort of little girl was Tanya at Moscow, and how Tanya couldread, and even taught the other children.
"Why, am I not so nice as she?" asked Seryozha.
"To me you’re nicer than anyone in the world."
"I know that," said Seryozha, smiling.
Anna had not had time to drink her coffee when the Countess LidiaIvanovna was announced. The Countess Lidia Ivanovna was a tall, stoutwoman, with an unhealthily sallow face and splendid, pensive black eyes.Anna liked her, but today she seemed to be seeing her for the first timewith all her defects.
"Well, my dear, so you took the olive branch?" inquired Countess LidiaIvanovna, as soon as she came into the room.
"Yes, it’s all over, but it was all much less serious than we hadsupposed," answered Anna. "My _belle-soeur_ is in general too hasty."
But Countess Lidia Ivanovna, though she was interested in everythingthat did not concern her, had a habit of never listening to whatinterested her; she interrupted Anna:
"Yes, there’s plenty of sorrow and evil in the world. I am so worriedtoday."
"Oh, why?" asked Anna, trying to suppress a smile.
"I’m beginning to be weary of fruitlessly championing the truth, andsometimes I’m quite unhinged by it. The Society of the Little Sisters"(this was a religiously-patriotic, philanthropic institution) "was goingsplendidly, but with these gentlemen it’s impossible to do anything,"added Countess Lidia Ivanovna in a tone of ironical submission todestiny. "They pounce on the idea, and distort it, and then work it outso pettily and unworthily. Two or three people, your husband among them,understand all the importance of the thing, but the others simply dragit down. Yesterday Pravdin wrote to me..."
Pravdin was a well-known Panslavist abroad, and Countess Lidia Ivanovnadescribed the purport of his letter.
Then the countess told her of more disagreements and intrigues againstthe work of the unification of the churches, and departed in haste, asshe had that day to be at the meeting of some society and also at theSlavonic committee.
"It was all the same before, of course; but why was it I didn’t noticeit before?" Anna asked herself. "Or has she been very much irritatedtoday? It’s really ludicrous; her object is doing good; she a Christian,yet she’s always angry; and she always has enemies, and always enemiesin the name of Christianity and doing good."
After Countess Lidia Ivanovna another friend came, the wife of a chiefsecretary, who told her all the news of the town. At three o’clock shetoo went away, promising to come to dinner. Alexey Alexandrovitch was atthe ministry. Anna, left alone, spent the time till dinner in assistingat her son’s dinner (he dined apart from his parents) and in putting herthings in order, and in reading and answering the notes and letterswhich had accumulated on her table.
The feeling of causeless shame, which she had felt on the journey, andher excitement, too, had completely vanished. In the habitual conditionsof her life she felt again resolute and irreproachable.
She recalled with wonder her state of mind on the previous day. "Whatwas it? Nothing. Vronsky said something silly, which it was easy to puta stop to, and I answered as I ought to have done. To speak of it to myhusband would be unnecessary and out of the question. To speak of itwould be to attach importance to what has no importance." She rememberedhow she had told her husband of what was almost a declaration made herat Petersburg by a young man, one of her husband’s subordinates, and howAlexey Alexandrovitch had answered that every woman living in the worldwas exposed to such incidents, but that he had the fullest confidence inher tact, and could never lower her and himself by jealousy. "So thenthere’s no reason to speak of it? And indeed, thank God, there’s nothingto speak of," she told herself.


Chapter 33

Alexey Alexandrovitch came back from the meeting of the ministers atfour o’clock, but as often happened, he had not time to come in to her.He went into his study to see the people waiting for him with petitions,and to sign some papers brought him by his chief secretary. At dinnertime (there were always a few people dining with the Karenins) therearrived an old lady, a cousin of Alexey Alexandrovitch, the chiefsecretary of the department and his wife, and a young man who had beenrecommended to Alexey Alexandrovitch for the service. Anna went into thedrawing room to receive these guests. Precisely at five o’clock, beforethe bronze Peter the First clock had struck the fifth stroke, AlexeyAlexandrovitch came in, wearing a white tie and evening coat with twostars, as he had to go out directly after dinner. Every minute of AlexeyAlexandrovitch’s life was portioned out and occupied. And to make timeto get through all that lay before him every day, he adhered to thestrictest punctuality. "Unhasting and unresting," was his motto. He cameinto the dining hall, greeted everyone, and hurriedly sat down, smilingto his wife.
"Yes, my solitude is over. You wouldn’t believe how uncomfortable" (helaid stress on the word _uncomfortable_) "it is to dine alone."
At dinner he talked a little to his wife about Moscow matters, and, witha sarcastic smile, asked her after Stepan Arkadyevitch; but theconversation was for the most part general, dealing with Petersburgofficial and public news. After dinner he spent half an hour with hisguests, and again, with a smile, pressed his wife’s hand, withdrew, anddrove off to the council. Anna did not go out that evening either to thePrincess Betsy Tverskaya, who, hearing of her return, had invited her,nor to the theater, where she had a box for that evening. She did not goout principally because the dress she had reckoned upon was not ready.Altogether, Anna, on turning, after the departure of her guests, to theconsideration of her attire, was very much annoyed. She was generally amistress of the art of dressing well without great expense, and beforeleaving Moscow she had given her dressmaker three dresses to transform.The dresses had to be altered so that they could not be recognized, andthey ought to have been ready three days before. It appeared that twodresses had not been done at all, while the other one had not beenaltered as Anna had intended. The dressmaker came to explain, declaringthat it would be better as she had done it, and Anna was so furious thatshe felt ashamed when she thought of it afterwards. To regain herserenity completely she went into the nursery, and spent the wholeevening with her son, put him to bed herself, signed him with the cross,and tucked him up. She was glad she had not gone out anywhere, and hadspent the evening so well. She felt so light-hearted and serene, she sawso clearly that all that had seemed to her so important on her railwayjourney was only one of the common trivial incidents of fashionablelife, and that she had no reason to feel ashamed before anyone else orbefore herself. Anna sat down at the hearth with an English novel andwaited for her husband. Exactly at half-past nine she heard his ring,and he came into the room.
"Here you are at last!" she observed, holding out her hand to him.
He kissed her hand and sat down beside her.
"Altogether then, I see your visit was a success," he said to her.
"Oh, yes," she said, and she began telling him about everything from thebeginning: her journey with Countess Vronskaya, her arrival, theaccident at the station. Then she described the pity she had felt, firstfor her brother, and afterwards for Dolly.
"I imagine one cannot exonerate such a man from blame, though he is yourbrother," said Alexey Alexandrovitch severely.
Anna smiled. She knew that he said that simply to show that familyconsiderations could not prevent him from expressing his genuineopinion. She knew that characteristic in her husband, and liked it.
"I am glad it has all ended so satisfactorily, and that you are backagain," he went on. "Come, what do they say about the new act I have gotpassed in the council?"
Anna had heard nothing of this act, and she felt conscience-stricken athaving been able so readily to forget what was to him of suchimportance.
"Here, on the other hand, it has made a great sensation," he said, witha complacent smile.
She saw that Alexey Alexandrovitch wanted to tell her something pleasantto him about it, and she brought him by questions to telling it. Withthe same complacent smile he told her of the ovations he had received inconsequence of the act he had passed.
"I was very, very glad. It shows that at last a reasonable and steadyview of the matter is becoming prevalent among us."
Having drunk his second cup of tea with cream, and bread, AlexeyAlexandrovitch got up, and was going towards his study.
"And you’ve not been anywhere this evening? You’ve been dull, I expect?"he said.
"Oh, no!" she answered, getting up after him and accompanying him acrossthe room to his study. "What are you reading now?" she asked.
"Just now I’m reading Duc de Lille, _Poésie des Enfers,_" he answered."A very remarkable book."
Anna smiled, as people smile at the weaknesses of those they love, and,putting her hand under his, she escorted him to the door of the study.She knew his habit, that had grown into a necessity, of reading in theevening. She knew, too, that in spite of his official duties, whichswallowed up almost the whole of his time, he considered it his duty tokeep up with everything of note that appeared in the intellectual world.She knew, too, that he was really interested in books dealing withpolitics, philosophy, and theology, that art was utterly foreign to hisnature; but, in spite of this, or rather, in consequence of it, AlexeyAlexandrovitch never passed over anything in the world of art, but madeit his duty to read everything. She knew that in politics, inphilosophy, in theology, Alexey Alexandrovitch often had doubts, andmade investigations; but on questions of art and poetry, and, above all,of music, of which he was totally devoid of understanding, he had themost distinct and decided opinions. He was fond of talking aboutShakespeare, Raphael, Beethoven, of the significance of new schools ofpoetry and music, all of which were classified by him with veryconspicuous consistency.
"Well, God be with you," she said at the door of the study, where ashaded candle and a decanter of water were already put by his armchair."And I’ll write to Moscow."
He pressed her hand, and again kissed it.
"All the same he’s a good man; truthful, good-hearted, and remarkable inhis own line," Anna said to herself going back to her room, as thoughshe were defending him to someone who had attacked him and said that onecould not love him. "But why is it his ears stick out so strangely? Orhas he had his hair cut?"
Precisely at twelve o’clock, when Anna was still sitting at her writingtable, finishing a letter to Dolly, she heard the sound of measuredsteps in slippers, and Alexey Alexandrovitch, freshly washed and combed,with a book under his arm, came in to her.
"It’s time, it’s time," said he, with a meaning smile, and he went intotheir bedroom.
"And what right had he to look at him like that?" thought Anna,recalling Vronsky’s glance at Alexey Alexandrovitch.
Undressing, she went into the bedroom; but her face had none of theeagerness which, during her stay in Moscow, had fairly flashed from hereyes and her smile; on the contrary, now the fire seemed quenched inher, hidden somewhere far away.


Chapter 34

When Vronsky went to Moscow from Petersburg, he had left his large setof rooms in Morskaia to his friend and favorite comrade Petritsky.
Petritsky was a young lieutenant, not particularly well-connected, andnot merely not wealthy, but always hopelessly in debt. Towards eveninghe was always drunk, and he had often been locked up after all sorts ofludicrous and disgraceful scandals, but he was a favorite both of hiscomrades and his superior officers. On arriving at twelve o’clock fromthe station at his flat, Vronsky saw, at the outer door, a hiredcarriage familiar to him. While still outside his own door, as he rang,he heard masculine laughter, the lisp of a feminine voice, andPetritsky’s voice. "If that’s one of the villains, don’t let him in!"Vronsky told the servant not to announce him, and slipped quietly intothe first room. Baroness Shilton, a friend of Petritsky’s, with a rosylittle face and flaxen hair, resplendent in a lilac satin gown, andfilling the whole room, like a canary, with her Parisian chatter, sat atthe round table making coffee. Petritsky, in his overcoat, and thecavalry captain Kamerovsky, in full uniform, probably just come fromduty, were sitting each side of her.
"Bravo! Vronsky!" shouted Petritsky, jumping up, scraping his chair."Our host himself! Baroness, some coffee for him out of the new coffeepot. Why, we didn’t expect you! Hope you’re satisfied with the ornamentof your study," he said, indicating the baroness. "You know each other,of course?"
"I should think so," said Vronsky, with a bright smile, pressing thebaroness’s little hand. "What next! I’m an old friend."
"You’re home after a journey," said the baroness, "so I’m flying. Oh,I’ll be off this minute, if I’m in the way."
"You’re home, wherever you are, baroness," said Vronsky. "How do you do,Kamerovsky?" he added, coldly shaking hands with Kamerovsky.
"There, you never know how to say such pretty things," said thebaroness, turning to Petritsky.
"No; what’s that for? After dinner I say things quite as good."
"After dinner there’s no credit in them? Well, then, I’ll make you somecoffee, so go and wash and get ready," said the baroness, sitting downagain, and anxiously turning the screw in the new coffee pot. "Pierre,give me the coffee," she said, addressing Petritsky, whom she calledPierre as a contraction of his surname, making no secret of herrelations with him. "I’ll put it in."
"You’ll spoil it!"
"No, I won’t spoil it! Well, and your wife?" said the baroness suddenly,interrupting Vronsky’s conversation with his comrade. "We’ve beenmarrying you here. Have you brought your wife?"
"No, baroness. I was born a Bohemian, and a Bohemian I shall die."
"So much the better, so much the better. Shake hands on it."
And the baroness, detaining Vronsky, began telling him, with many jokes,about her last new plans of life, asking his advice.
"He persists in refusing to give me a divorce! Well, what am I to do?"(_He_ was her husband.) "Now I want to begin a suit against him. What doyou advise? Kamerovsky, look after the coffee; it’s boiling over. Yousee, I’m engrossed with business! I want a lawsuit, because I must havemy property. Do you understand the folly of it, that on the pretext ofmy being unfaithful to him," she said contemptuously, "he wants to getthe benefit of my fortune."
Vronsky heard with pleasure this light-hearted prattle of a prettywoman, agreed with her, gave her half-joking counsel, and altogetherdropped at once into the tone habitual to him in talking to such women.In his Petersburg world all people were divided into utterly opposedclasses. One, the lower class, vulgar, stupid, and, above all,ridiculous people, who believe that one husband ought to live with theone wife whom he has lawfully married; that a girl should be innocent, awoman modest, and a man manly, self-controlled, and strong; that oneought to bring up one’s children, earn one’s bread, and pay one’s debts;and various similar absurdities. This was the class of old-fashioned andridiculous people. But there was another class of people, the realpeople. To this class they all belonged, and in it the great thing wasto be elegant, generous, plucky, gay, to abandon oneself without a blushto every passion, and to laugh at everything else.
For the first moment only, Vronsky was startled after the impression ofa quite different world that he had brought with him from Moscow. Butimmediately as though slipping his feet into old slippers, he droppedback into the light-hearted, pleasant world he had always lived in.
The coffee was never really made, but spluttered over every one, andboiled away, doing just what was required of it—that is, providing muchcause for much noise and laughter, and spoiling a costly rug and thebaroness’s gown.
"Well now, good-bye, or you’ll never get washed, and I shall have on myconscience the worst sin a gentleman can commit. So you would advise aknife to his throat?"
"To be sure, and manage that your hand may not be far from his lips.He’ll kiss your hand, and all will end satisfactorily," answeredVronsky.
"So at the Francais!" and, with a rustle of her skirts, she vanished.
Kamerovsky got up too, and Vronsky, not waiting for him to go, shookhands and went off to his dressing room.
While he was washing, Petritsky described to him in brief outlines hisposition, as far as it had changed since Vronsky had left Petersburg. Nomoney at all. His father said he wouldn’t give him any and pay hisdebts. His tailor was trying to get him locked up, and another fellow,too, was threatening to get him locked up. The colonel of the regimenthad announced that if these scandals did not cease he would have toleave. As for the baroness, he was sick to death of her, especiallysince she’d taken to offering continually to lend him money. But he hadfound a girl—he’d show her to Vronsky—a marvel, exquisite, in the strictOriental style, "genre of the slave Rebecca, don’t you know." He’d had arow, too, with Berkoshov, and was going to send seconds to him, but ofcourse it would come to nothing. Altogether everything was supremelyamusing and jolly. And, not letting his comrade enter into furtherdetails of his position, Petritsky proceeded to tell him all theinteresting news. As he listened to Petritsky’s familiar stories in thefamiliar setting of the rooms he had spent the last three years in,Vronsky felt a delightful sense of coming back to the carelessPetersburg life that he was used to.
"Impossible!" he cried, letting down the pedal of the washing basin inwhich he had been sousing his healthy red neck. "Impossible!" he cried,at the news that Laura had flung over Fertinghof and had made up toMileev. "And is he as stupid and pleased as ever? Well, and how’sBuzulukov?"
"Oh, there is a tale about Buzulukov—simply lovely!" cried Petritsky."You know his weakness for balls, and he never misses a single courtball. He went to a big ball in a new helmet. Have you seen the newhelmets? Very nice, lighter. Well, so he’s standing.... No, I say, dolisten."
"I am listening," answered Vronsky, rubbing himself with a rough towel.
"Up comes the Grand Duchess with some ambassador or other, and, asill-luck would have it, she begins talking to him about the new helmets.The Grand Duchess positively wanted to show the new helmet to theambassador. They see our friend standing there." (Petritsky mimicked howhe was standing with the helmet.) "The Grand Duchess asked him to giveher the helmet; he doesn’t give it to her. What do you think of that?Well, every one’s winking at him, nodding, frowning—give it to her, do!He doesn’t give it to her. He’s mute as a fish. Only picture it!...Well, the ... what’s his name, whatever he was ... tries to take thehelmet from him ... he won’t give it up!... He pulls it from him, andhands it to the Grand Duchess. ‘Here, your Highness,’ says he, ‘is thenew helmet.’ She turned the helmet the other side up, And—just pictureit!—plop went a pear and sweetmeats out of it, two pounds ofsweetmeats!... He’d been storing them up, the darling!"
Vronsky burst into roars of laughter. And long afterwards, when he wastalking of other things, he broke out into his healthy laugh, showinghis strong, close rows of teeth, when he thought of the helmet.
Having heard all the news, Vronsky, with the assistance of his valet,got into his uniform, and went off to report himself. He intended, whenhe had done that, to drive to his brother’s and to Betsy’s and to payseveral visits with a view to beginning to go into that society where hemight meet Madame Karenina. As he always did in Petersburg, he left homenot meaning to return till late at night.



PART TWO


Chapter 1

At the end of the winter, in the Shtcherbatskys’ house, a consultationwas being held, which was to pronounce on the state of Kitty’s healthand the measures to be taken to restore her failing strength. She hadbeen ill, and as spring came on she grew worse. The family doctor gaveher cod liver oil, then iron, then nitrate of silver, but as the firstand the second and the third were alike in doing no good, and as hisadvice when spring came was to go abroad, a celebrated physician wascalled in. The celebrated physician, a very handsome man, stillyoungish, asked to examine the patient. He maintained, with peculiarsatisfaction, it seemed, that maiden modesty is a mere relic ofbarbarism, and that nothing could be more natural than for a man stillyoungish to handle a young girl naked. He thought it natural because hedid it every day, and felt and thought, as it seemed to him, no harm ashe did it and consequently he considered modesty in the girl not merelyas a relic of barbarism, but also as an insult to himself.
There was nothing for it but to submit, since, although all the doctorshad studied in the same school, had read the same books, and learned thesame science, and though some people said this celebrated doctor was abad doctor, in the princess’s household and circle it was for somereason accepted that this celebrated doctor alone had some specialknowledge, and that he alone could save Kitty. After a carefulexamination and sounding of the bewildered patient, dazed with shame,the celebrated doctor, having scrupulously washed his hands, wasstanding in the drawing room talking to the prince. The prince frownedand coughed, listening to the doctor. As a man who had seen something oflife, and neither a fool nor an invalid, he had no faith in medicine,and in his heart was furious at the whole farce, specially as he wasperhaps the only one who fully comprehended the cause of Kitty’sillness. "Conceited blockhead!" he thought, as he listened to thecelebrated doctor’s chatter about his daughter’s symptoms. The doctorwas meantime with difficulty restraining the expression of his contemptfor this old gentleman, and with difficulty condescending to the levelof his intelligence. He perceived that it was no good talking to the oldman, and that the principal person in the house was the mother. Beforeher he decided to scatter his pearls. At that instant the princess cameinto the drawing room with the family doctor. The prince withdrew,trying not to show how ridiculous he thought the whole performance. Theprincess was distracted, and did not know what to do. She felt she hadsinned against Kitty.
"Well, doctor, decide our fate," said the princess. "Tell meeverything."
"Is there hope?" she meant to say, but her lips quivered, and she couldnot utter the question. "Well, doctor?"
"Immediately, princess. I will talk it over with my colleague, and thenI will have the honor of laying my opinion before you."
"So we had better leave you?"
"As you please."
The princess went out with a sigh.
When the doctors were left alone, the family doctor began timidlyexplaining his opinion, that there was a commencement of tuberculoustrouble, but ... and so on. The celebrated doctor listened to him, andin the middle of his sentence looked at his big gold watch.
"Yes," said he. "But..."
The family doctor respectfully ceased in the middle of his observations.
"The commencement of the tuberculous process we are not, as you areaware, able to define; till there are cavities, there is nothingdefinite. But we may suspect it. And there are indications;malnutrition, nervous excitability, and so on. The question stands thus:in presence of indications of tuberculous process, what is to be done tomaintain nutrition?"
"But, you know, there are always moral, spiritual causes at the back inthese cases," the family doctor permitted himself to interpolate with asubtle smile.
"Yes, that’s an understood thing," responded the celebrated physician,again glancing at his watch. "Beg pardon, is the Yausky bridge done yet,or shall I have to drive around?" he asked. "Ah! it is. Oh, well, then Ican do it in twenty minutes. So we were saying the problem may be putthus: to maintain nutrition and to give tone to the nerves. The one isin close connection with the other, one must attack both sides at once."
"And how about a tour abroad?" asked the family doctor.
"I’ve no liking for foreign tours. And take note: if there is an earlystage of tuberculous process, of which we cannot be certain, a foreigntour will be of no use. What is wanted is means of improving nutrition,and not for lowering it." And the celebrated doctor expounded his planof treatment with Soden waters, a remedy obviously prescribed primarilyon the ground that they could do no harm.
The family doctor listened attentively and respectfully.
"But in favor of foreign travel I would urge the change of habits, theremoval from conditions calling up reminiscences. And then the motherwishes it," he added.
"Ah! Well, in that case, to be sure, let them go. Only, those Germanquacks are mischievous.... They ought to be persuaded.... Well, let themgo then."
He glanced once more at his watch.
"Oh! time’s up already," And he went to the door. The celebrated doctorannounced to the princess (a feeling of what was due from him dictatedhis doing so) that he ought to see the patient once more.
"What! another examination!" cried the mother, with horror.
"Oh, no, only a few details, princess."
"Come this way."
And the mother, accompanied by the doctor, went into the drawing room toKitty. Wasted and flushed, with a peculiar glitter in her eyes, leftthere by the agony of shame she had been put through, Kitty stood in themiddle of the room. When the doctor came in she flushed crimson, and hereyes filled with tears. All her illness and treatment struck her as athing so stupid, ludicrous even! Doctoring her seemed to her as absurdas putting together the pieces of a broken vase. Her heart was broken.Why would they try to cure her with pills and powders? But she could notgrieve her mother, especially as her mother considered herself to blame.
"May I trouble you to sit down, princess?" the celebrated doctor said toher.
He sat down with a smile, facing her, felt her pulse, and again beganasking her tiresome questions. She answered him, and all at once got up,furious.
"Excuse me, doctor, but there is really no object in this. This is thethird time you’ve asked me the same thing."
The celebrated doctor did not take offense.
"Nervous irritability," he said to the princess, when Kitty had left theroom. "However, I had finished..."
And the doctor began scientifically explaining to the princess, as anexceptionally intelligent woman, the condition of the young princess,and concluded by insisting on the drinking of the waters, which werecertainly harmless. At the question: Should they go abroad? the doctorplunged into deep meditation, as though resolving a weighty problem.Finally his decision was pronounced: they were to go abroad, but to putno faith in foreign quacks, and to apply to him in any need.
It seemed as though some piece of good fortune had come to pass afterthe doctor had gone. The mother was much more cheerful when she wentback to her daughter, and Kitty pretended to be more cheerful. She hadoften, almost always, to be pretending now.
"Really, I’m quite well, mamma. But if you want to go abroad, let’s go!"she said, and trying to appear interested in the proposed tour, shebegan talking of the preparations for the journey.


Chapter 2

Soon after the doctor, Dolly had arrived. She knew that there was to bea consultation that day, and though she was only just up after herconfinement (she had another baby, a little girl, born at the end of thewinter), though she had trouble and anxiety enough of her own, she hadleft her tiny baby and a sick child, to come and hear Kitty’s fate,which was to be decided that day.
"Well, well?" she said, coming into the drawing room, without taking offher hat. "You’re all in good spirits. Good news, then?"
They tried to tell her what the doctor had said, but it appeared thatthough the doctor had talked distinctly enough and at great length, itwas utterly impossible to report what he had said. The only point ofinterest was that it was settled they should go abroad.
Dolly could not help sighing. Her dearest friend, her sister, was goingaway. And her life was not a cheerful one. Her relations with StepanArkadyevitch after their reconciliation had become humiliating. Theunion Anna had cemented turned out to be of no solid character, andfamily harmony was breaking down again at the same point. There had beennothing definite, but Stepan Arkadyevitch was hardly ever at home;money, too, was hardly ever forthcoming, and Dolly was continuallytortured by suspicions of infidelity, which she tried to dismiss,dreading the agonies of jealousy she had been through already. The firstonslaught of jealousy, once lived through, could never come back again,and even the discovery of infidelities could never now affect her as ithad the first time. Such a discovery now would only mean breaking upfamily habits, and she let herself be deceived, despising him and stillmore herself, for the weakness. Besides this, the care of her largefamily was a constant worry to her: first, the nursing of her young babydid not go well, then the nurse had gone away, now one of the childrenhad fallen ill.
"Well, how are all of you?" asked her mother.
"Ah, mamma, we have plenty of troubles of our own. Lili is ill, and I’mafraid it’s scarlatina. I have come here now to hear about Kitty, andthen I shall shut myself up entirely, if—God forbid—it should bescarlatina."
The old prince too had come in from his study after the doctor’sdeparture, and after presenting his cheek to Dolly, and saying a fewwords to her, he turned to his wife:
"How have you settled it? you’re going? Well, and what do you mean to dowith me?"
"I suppose you had better stay here, Alexander," said his wife.
"That’s as you like."
"Mamma, why shouldn’t father come with us?" said Kitty. "It would benicer for him and for us too."
The old prince got up and stroked Kitty’s hair. She lifted her head andlooked at him with a forced smile. It always seemed to her that heunderstood her better than anyone in the family, though he did not saymuch about her. Being the youngest, she was her father’s favorite, andshe fancied that his love gave him insight. When now her glance met hisblue kindly eyes looking intently at her, it seemed to her that he sawright through her, and understood all that was not good that was passingwithin her. Reddening, she stretched out towards him expecting a kiss,but he only patted her hair and said:
"These stupid chignons! There’s no getting at the real daughter. Onesimply strokes the bristles of dead women. Well, Dolinka," he turned tohis elder daughter, "what’s your young buck about, hey?"
"Nothing, father," answered Dolly, understanding that her husband wasmeant. "He’s always out; I scarcely ever see him," she could not resistadding with a sarcastic smile.
"Why, hasn’t he gone into the country yet—to see about selling thatforest?"
"No, he’s still getting ready for the journey."
"Oh, that’s it!" said the prince. "And so am I to be getting ready for ajourney too? At your service," he said to his wife, sitting down. "And Itell you what, Katia," he went on to his younger daughter, "you mustwake up one fine day and say to yourself: Why, I’m quite well, andmerry, and going out again with father for an early morning walk in thefrost. Hey?"
What her father said seemed simple enough, yet at these words Kittybecame confused and overcome like a detected criminal. "Yes, he sees itall, he understands it all, and in these words he’s telling me thatthough I’m ashamed, I must get over my shame." She could not pluck upspirit to make any answer. She tried to begin, and all at once burstinto tears, and rushed out of the room.
"See what comes of your jokes!" the princess pounced down on herhusband. "You’re always..." she began a string of reproaches.
The prince listened to the princess’s scolding rather a long whilewithout speaking, but his face was more and more frowning.
"She’s so much to be pitied, poor child, so much to be pitied, and youdon’t feel how it hurts her to hear the slightest reference to the causeof it. Ah! to be so mistaken in people!" said the princess, and by thechange in her tone both Dolly and the prince knew she was speaking ofVronsky. "I don’t know why there aren’t laws against such base,dishonorable people."
"Ah, I can’t bear to hear you!" said the prince gloomily, getting upfrom his low chair, and seeming anxious to get away, yet stopping in thedoorway. "There are laws, madam, and since you’ve challenged me to it,I’ll tell you who’s to blame for it all: you and you, you and nobodyelse. Laws against such young gallants there have always been, and therestill are! Yes, if there has been nothing that ought not to have been,old as I am, I’d have called him out to the barrier, the young dandy.Yes, and now you physic her and call in these quacks."
The prince apparently had plenty more to say, but as soon as theprincess heard his tone she subsided at once, and became penitent, asshe always did on serious occasions.
"Alexander, Alexander," she whispered, moving to him and beginning toweep.
As soon as she began to cry the prince too calmed down. He went up toher.
"There, that’s enough, that’s enough! You’re wretched too, I know. Itcan’t be helped. There’s no great harm done. God is merciful ...thanks..." he said, not knowing what he was saying, as he responded tothe tearful kiss of the princess that he felt on his hand. And theprince went out of the room.
Before this, as soon as Kitty went out of the room in tears, Dolly, withher motherly, family instincts, had promptly perceived that here awoman’s work lay before her, and she prepared to do it. She took off herhat, and, morally speaking, tucked up her sleeves and prepared foraction. While her mother was attacking her father, she tried to restrainher mother, so far as filial reverence would allow. During the prince’soutburst she was silent; she felt ashamed for her mother, and tendertowards her father for so quickly being kind again. But when her fatherleft them she made ready for what was the chief thing needful—to go toKitty and console her.
"I’d been meaning to tell you something for a long while, mamma: did youknow that Levin meant to make Kitty an offer when he was here the lasttime? He told Stiva so."
"Well, what then? I don’t understand..."
"So did Kitty perhaps refuse him?... She didn’t tell you so?"
"No, she has said nothing to me either of one or the other; she’s tooproud. But I know it’s all on account of the other."
"Yes, but suppose she has refused Levin, and she wouldn’t have refusedhim if it hadn’t been for the other, I know. And then, he has deceivedher so horribly."
It was too terrible for the princess to think how she had sinned againsther daughter, and she broke out angrily.
"Oh, I really don’t understand! Nowadays they will all go their own way,and mothers haven’t a word to say in anything, and then..."
"Mamma, I’ll go up to her."
"Well, do. Did I tell you not to?" said her mother.


Chapter 3

When she went into Kitty’s little room, a pretty, pink little room, fullof knick-knacks in _vieux saxe,_ as fresh, and pink, and white, and gayas Kitty herself had been two months ago, Dolly remembered how they haddecorated the room the year before together, with what love and gaiety.Her heart turned cold when she saw Kitty sitting on a low chair near thedoor, her eyes fixed immovably on a corner of the rug. Kitty glanced ather sister, and the cold, rather ill-tempered expression of her face didnot change.
"I’m just going now, and I shall have to keep in and you won’t be ableto come to see me," said Dolly, sitting down beside her. "I want to talkto you."
"What about?" Kitty asked swiftly, lifting her head in dismay.
"What should it be, but your trouble?"
"I have no trouble."
"Nonsense, Kitty. Do you suppose I could help knowing? I know all aboutit. And believe me, it’s of so little consequence.... We’ve all beenthrough it."
Kitty did not speak, and her face had a stern expression.
"He’s not worth your grieving over him," pursued Darya Alexandrovna,coming straight to the point.
"No, because he has treated me with contempt," said Kitty, in a breakingvoice. "Don’t talk of it! Please, don’t talk of it!"
"But who can have told you so? No one has said that. I’m certain he wasin love with you, and would still be in love with you, if it hadn’t...
"Oh, the most awful thing of all for me is this sympathizing!" shriekedKitty, suddenly flying into a passion. She turned round on her chair,flushed crimson, and rapidly moving her fingers, pinched the clasp ofher belt first with one hand and then with the other. Dolly knew thistrick her sister had of clenching her hands when she was much excited;she knew, too, that in moments of excitement Kitty was capable offorgetting herself and saying a great deal too much, and Dolly wouldhave soothed her, but it was too late.
"What, what is it you want to make me feel, eh?" said Kitty quickly."That I’ve been in love with a man who didn’t care a straw for me, andthat I’m dying of love for him? And this is said to me by my own sister,who imagines that ... that ... that she’s sympathizing with me!... Idon’t want these condolences and humbug!"
"Kitty, you’re unjust."
"Why are you tormenting me?"
"But I ... quite the contrary ... I see you’re unhappy..."
But Kitty in her fury did not hear her.
"I’ve nothing to grieve over and be comforted about. I am too proud everto allow myself to care for a man who does not love me."
"Yes, I don’t say so either.... Only one thing. Tell me the truth," saidDarya Alexandrovna, taking her by the hand: "tell me, did Levin speak toyou?..."
The mention of Levin’s name seemed to deprive Kitty of the last vestigeof self-control. She leaped up from her chair, and flinging her clasp onthe ground, she gesticulated rapidly with her hands and said:
"Why bring Levin in too? I can’t understand what you want to torment mefor. I’ve told you, and I say it again, that I have some pride, andnever, _never_ would I do as you’re doing—go back to a man who’sdeceived you, who has cared for another woman. I can’t understand it!You may, but I can’t!"
And saying these words she glanced at her sister, and seeing that Dollysat silent, her head mournfully bowed, Kitty, instead of running out ofthe room as she had meant to do, sat down near the door, and hid herface in her handkerchief.
The silence lasted for two minutes: Dolly was thinking of herself. Thathumiliation of which she was always conscious came back to her with apeculiar bitterness when her sister reminded her of it. She had notlooked for such cruelty in her sister, and she was angry with her. Butsuddenly she heard the rustle of a skirt, and with it the sound ofheart-rending, smothered sobbing, and felt arms about her neck. Kittywas on her knees before her.
"Dolinka, I am so, so wretched!" she whispered penitently. And the sweetface covered with tears hid itself in Darya Alexandrovna’s skirt.
As though tears were the indispensable oil, without which the machineryof mutual confidence could not run smoothly between the two sisters, thesisters after their tears talked, not of what was uppermost in theirminds, but, though they talked of outside matters, they understood eachother. Kitty knew that the words she had uttered in anger about herhusband’s infidelity and her humiliating position had cut her poorsister to the heart, but that she had forgiven her. Dolly for her partknew all she had wanted to find out. She felt certain that her surmiseswere correct; that Kitty’s misery, her inconsolable misery, was dueprecisely to the fact that Levin had made her an offer and she hadrefused him, and Vronsky had deceived her, and that she was fullyprepared to love Levin and to detest Vronsky. Kitty said not a word ofthat; she talked of nothing but her spiritual condition.
"I have nothing to make me miserable," she said, getting calmer; "butcan you understand that everything has become hateful, loathsome, coarseto me, and I myself most of all? You can’t imagine what loathsomethoughts I have about everything."
"Why, whatever loathsome thoughts can you have?" asked Dolly, smiling.
"The most utterly loathsome and coarse: I can’t tell you. It’s notunhappiness, or low spirits, but much worse. As though everything thatwas good in me was all hidden away, and nothing was left but the mostloathsome. Come, how am I to tell you?" she went on, seeing the puzzledlook in her sister’s eyes. "Father began saying something to me justnow.... It seems to me he thinks all I want is to be married. Mothertakes me to a ball: it seems to me she only takes me to get me marriedoff as soon as may be, and be rid of me. I know it’s not the truth, butI can’t drive away such thoughts. Eligible suitors, as they call them—Ican’t bear to see them. It seems to me they’re taking stock of me andsumming me up. In old days to go anywhere in a ball dress was a simplejoy to me, I admired myself; now I feel ashamed and awkward. And then!The doctor.... Then..." Kitty hesitated; she wanted to say further thatever since this change had taken place in her, Stepan Arkadyevitch hadbecome insufferably repulsive to her, and that she could not see himwithout the grossest and most hideous conceptions rising before herimagination.
"Oh, well, everything presents itself to me, in the coarsest, mostloathsome light," she went on. "That’s my illness. Perhaps it will passoff."
"But you mustn’t think about it."
"I can’t help it. I’m never happy except with the children at yourhouse."
"What a pity you can’t be with me!"
"Oh, yes, I’m coming. I’ve had scarlatina, and I’ll persuade mamma tolet me."
Kitty insisted on having her way, and went to stay at her sister’s andnursed the children all through the scarlatina, for scarlatina it turnedout to be. The two sisters brought all the six children successfullythrough it, but Kitty was no better in health, and in Lent theShtcherbatskys went abroad.


Chapter 4

The highest Petersburg society is essentially one: in it everyone knowseveryone else, everyone even visits everyone else. But this great sethas its subdivisions. Anna Arkadyevna Karenina had friends and closeties in three different circles of this highest society. One circle washer husband’s government official set, consisting of his colleagues andsubordinates, brought together in the most various and capriciousmanner, and belonging to different social strata. Anna found itdifficult now to recall the feeling of almost awe-stricken reverencewhich she had at first entertained for these persons. Now she knew allof them as people know one another in a country town; she knew theirhabits and weaknesses, and where the shoe pinched each one of them. Sheknew their relations with one another and with the head authorities,knew who was for whom, and how each one maintained his position, andwhere they agreed and disagreed. But the circle of political, masculineinterests had never interested her, in spite of countess LidiaIvanovna’s influence, and she avoided it.
Another little set with which Anna was in close relations was the one bymeans of which Alexey Alexandrovitch had made his career. The center ofthis circle was the Countess Lidia Ivanovna. It was a set made up ofelderly, ugly, benevolent, and godly women, and clever, learned, andambitious men. One of the clever people belonging to the set had calledit "the conscience of Petersburg society." Alexey Alexandrovitch had thehighest esteem for this circle, and Anna with her special gift forgetting on with everyone, had in the early days of her life inPetersburg made friends in this circle also. Now, since her return fromMoscow, she had come to feel this set insufferable. It seemed to herthat both she and all of them were insincere, and she felt so bored andill at ease in that world that she went to see the Countess LidiaIvanovna as little as possible.
The third circle with which Anna had ties was preeminently thefashionable world—the world of balls, of dinners, of sumptuous dresses,the world that hung on to the court with one hand, so as to avoidsinking to the level of the demi-monde. For the demi-monde the membersof that fashionable world believed that they despised, though theirtastes were not merely similar, but in fact identical. Her connectionwith this circle was kept up through Princess Betsy Tverskaya, hercousin’s wife, who had an income of a hundred and twenty thousandroubles, and who had taken a great fancy to Anna ever since she firstcame out, showed her much attention, and drew her into her set, makingfun of Countess Lidia Ivanovna’s coterie.
"When I’m old and ugly I’ll be the same," Betsy used to say; "but for apretty young woman like you it’s early days for that house of charity."
Anna had at first avoided as far as she could Princess Tverskaya’sworld, because it necessitated an expenditure beyond her means, andbesides in her heart she preferred the first circle. But since her visitto Moscow she had done quite the contrary. She avoided herserious-minded friends, and went out into the fashionable world. Thereshe met Vronsky, and experienced an agitating joy at those meetings. Shemet Vronsky specially often at Betsy’s for Betsy was a Vronsky by birthand his cousin. Vronsky was everywhere where he had any chance ofmeeting Anna, and speaking to her, when he could, of his love. She gavehim no encouragement, but every time she met him there surged up in herheart that same feeling of quickened life that had come upon her thatday in the railway carriage when she saw him for the first time. She wasconscious herself that her delight sparkled in her eyes and curved herlips into a smile, and she could not quench the expression of thisdelight.
At first Anna sincerely believed that she was displeased with him fordaring to pursue her. Soon after her return from Moscow, on arriving ata _soirée_ where she had expected to meet him, and not finding himthere, she realized distinctly from the rush of disappointment that shehad been deceiving herself, and that this pursuit was not merely notdistasteful to her, but that it made the whole interest of her life.
A celebrated singer was singing for the second time, and all thefashionable world was in the theater. Vronsky, seeing his cousin fromhis stall in the front row, did not wait till the entr’acte, but went toher box.
"Why didn’t you come to dinner?" she said to him. "I marvel at thesecond sight of lovers," she added with a smile, so that no one but hecould hear; "_she wasn’t there_. But come after the opera."
Vronsky looked inquiringly at her. She nodded. He thanked her by asmile, and sat down beside her.
"But how I remember your jeers!" continued Princess Betsy, who took apeculiar pleasure in following up this passion to a successful issue."What’s become of all that? You’re caught, my dear boy."
"That’s my one desire, to be caught," answered Vronsky, with his serene,good-humored smile. "If I complain of anything it’s only that I’m notcaught enough, to tell the truth. I begin to lose hope."
"Why, whatever hope can you have?" said Betsy, offended on behalf of herfriend. "_Entendons nous...._" But in her eyes there were gleams oflight that betrayed that she understood perfectly and precisely as hedid what hope he might have.
"None whatever," said Vronsky, laughing and showing his even rows ofteeth. "Excuse me," he added, taking an opera glass out of her hand, andproceeding to scrutinize, over her bare shoulder, the row of boxesfacing them. "I’m afraid I’m becoming ridiculous."
He was very well aware that he ran no risk of being ridiculous in theeyes of Betsy or any other fashionable people. He was very well awarethat in their eyes the position of an unsuccessful lover of a girl, orof any woman free to marry, might be ridiculous. But the position of aman pursuing a married woman, and, regardless of everything, staking hislife on drawing her into adultery, has something fine and grand aboutit, and can never be ridiculous; and so it was with a proud and gaysmile under his mustaches that he lowered the opera glass and looked athis cousin.
"But why was it you didn’t come to dinner?" she said, admiring him.
"I must tell you about that. I was busily employed, and doing what, doyou suppose? I’ll give you a hundred guesses, a thousand ... you’d neverguess. I’ve been reconciling a husband with a man who’d insulted hiswife. Yes, really!"
"Well, did you succeed?"
"Almost."
"You really must tell me about it," she said, getting up. "Come to me inthe next _entr’acte._"
"I can’t; I’m going to the French theater."
"From Nilsson?" Betsy queried in horror, though she could not herselfhave distinguished Nilsson’s voice from any chorus girl’s.
"Can’t help it. I’ve an appointment there, all to do with my mission ofpeace."
"‘Blessed are the peacemakers; theirs is the kingdom of heaven,’" saidBetsy, vaguely recollecting she had heard some similar saying fromsomeone. "Very well, then, sit down, and tell me what it’s all about."
And she sat down again.


Chapter 5

"This is rather indiscreet, but it’s so good it’s an awful temptation totell the story," said Vronsky, looking at her with his laughing eyes."I’m not going to mention any names."
"But I shall guess, so much the better."
"Well, listen: two festive young men were driving—"
"Officers of your regiment, of course?"
"I didn’t say they were officers,—two young men who had been lunching."
"In other words, drinking."
"Possibly. They were driving on their way to dinner with a friend in themost festive state of mind. And they beheld a pretty woman in a hiredsledge; she overtakes them, looks round at them, and, so they fancyanyway, nods to them and laughs. They, of course, follow her. Theygallop at full speed. To their amazement, the fair one alights at theentrance of the very house to which they were going. The fair one dartsupstairs to the top story. They get a glimpse of red lips under a shortveil, and exquisite little feet."
"You describe it with such feeling that I fancy you must be one of thetwo."
"And after what you said, just now! Well, the young men go in to theircomrade’s; he was giving a farewell dinner. There they certainly diddrink a little too much, as one always does at farewell dinners. And atdinner they inquire who lives at the top in that house. No one knows;only their host’s valet, in answer to their inquiry whether any ‘youngladies’ are living on the top floor, answered that there were a greatmany of them about there. After dinner the two young men go into theirhost’s study, and write a letter to the unknown fair one. They composean ardent epistle, a declaration in fact, and they carry the letterupstairs themselves, so as to elucidate whatever might appear notperfectly intelligible in the letter."
"Why are you telling me these horrible stories? Well?"
"They ring. A maid-servant opens the door, they hand her the letter, andassure the maid that they’re both so in love that they’ll die on thespot at the door. The maid, stupefied, carries in their messages. All atonce a gentleman appears with whiskers like sausages, as red as alobster, announces that there is no one living in the flat except hiswife, and sends them both about their business."
"How do you know he had whiskers like sausages, as you say?"
"Ah, you shall hear. I’ve just been to make peace between them."
"Well, and what then?"
"That’s the most interesting part of the story. It appears that it’s ahappy couple, a government clerk and his lady. The government clerklodges a complaint, and I became a mediator, and such a mediator!... Iassure you Talleyrand couldn’t hold a candle to me."
"Why, where was the difficulty?"
"Ah, you shall hear.... We apologize in due form: we are in despair, weentreat forgiveness for the unfortunate misunderstanding. The governmentclerk with the sausages begins to melt, but he, too, desires to expresshis sentiments, and as soon as ever he begins to express them, he beginsto get hot and say nasty things, and again I’m obliged to trot out allmy diplomatic talents. I allowed that their conduct was bad, but I urgedhim to take into consideration their heedlessness, their youth; then,too, the young men had only just been lunching together. ‘Youunderstand. They regret it deeply, and beg you to overlook theirmisbehavior.’ The government clerk was softened once more. ‘I consent,count, and am ready to overlook it; but you perceive that my wife—mywife’s a respectable woman—has been exposed to the persecution, andinsults, and effrontery of young upstarts, scoundrels....’ And you mustunderstand, the young upstarts are present all the while, and I have tokeep the peace between them. Again I call out all my diplomacy, andagain as soon as the thing was about at an end, our friend thegovernment clerk gets hot and red, and his sausages stand on end withwrath, and once more I launch out into diplomatic wiles."
"Ah, he must tell you this story!" said Betsy, laughing, to a lady whocame into her box. "He has been making me laugh so."
"Well, _bonne chance_!" she added, giving Vronsky one finger of the handin which she held her fan, and with a shrug of her shoulders shetwitched down the bodice of her gown that had worked up, so as to beduly naked as she moved forward towards the footlights into the light ofthe gas, and the sight of all eyes.
Vronsky drove to the French theater, where he really had to see thecolonel of his regiment, who never missed a single performance there. Hewanted to see him, to report on the result of his mediation, which hadoccupied and amused him for the last three days. Petritsky, whom heliked, was implicated in the affair, and the other culprit was a capitalfellow and first-rate comrade, who had lately joined the regiment, theyoung Prince Kedrov. And what was most important, the interests of theregiment were involved in it too.
Both the young men were in Vronsky’s company. The colonel of theregiment was waited upon by the government clerk, Venden, with acomplaint against his officers, who had insulted his wife. His youngwife, so Venden told the story—he had been married half a year—was atchurch with her mother, and suddenly overcome by indisposition, arisingfrom her interesting condition, she could not remain standing, she drovehome in the first sledge, a smart-looking one, she came across. On thespot the officers set off in pursuit of her; she was alarmed, andfeeling still more unwell, ran up the staircase home. Venden himself, onreturning from his office, heard a ring at their bell and voices, wentout, and seeing the intoxicated officers with a letter, he had turnedthem out. He asked for exemplary punishment.
"Yes, it’s all very well," said the colonel to Vronsky, whom he hadinvited to come and see him. "Petritsky’s becoming impossible. Not aweek goes by without some scandal. This government clerk won’t let itdrop, he’ll go on with the thing."
Vronsky saw all the thanklessness of the business, and that there couldbe no question of a duel in it, that everything must be done to softenthe government clerk, and hush the matter up. The colonel had called inVronsky just because he knew him to be an honorable and intelligent man,and, more than all, a man who cared for the honor of the regiment. Theytalked it over, and decided that Petritsky and Kedrov must go withVronsky to Venden’s to apologize. The colonel and Vronsky were bothfully aware that Vronsky’s name and rank would be sure to contributegreatly to the softening of the injured husband’s feelings.
And these two influences were not in fact without effect; though theresult remained, as Vronsky had described, uncertain.
On reaching the French theater, Vronsky retired to the foyer with thecolonel, and reported to him his success, or non-success. The colonel,thinking it all over, made up his mind not to pursue the matter further,but then for his own satisfaction proceeded to cross-examine Vronskyabout his interview; and it was a long while before he could restrainhis laughter, as Vronsky described how the government clerk, aftersubsiding for a while, would suddenly flare up again, as he recalled thedetails, and how Vronsky, at the last half word of conciliation,skillfully maneuvered a retreat, shoving Petritsky out before him.
"It’s a disgraceful story, but killing. Kedrov really can’t fight thegentleman! Was he so awfully hot?" he commented, laughing. "But what doyou say to Claire today? She’s marvelous," he went on, speaking of a newFrench actress. "However often you see her, every day she’s different.It’s only the French who can do that."


Chapter 6

Princess Betsy drove home from the theater, without waiting for the endof the last act. She had only just time to go into her dressing room,sprinkle her long, pale face with powder, rub it, set her dress torights, and order tea in the big drawing room, when one after anothercarriages drove up to her huge house in Bolshaia Morskaia. Her guestsstepped out at the wide entrance, and the stout porter, who used to readthe newspapers in the mornings behind the glass door, to the edificationof the passers-by, noiselessly opened the immense door, letting thevisitors pass by him into the house.
Almost at the same instant the hostess, with freshly arranged coiffureand freshened face, walked in at one door and her guests at the otherdoor of the drawing room, a large room with dark walls, downy rugs, anda brightly lighted table, gleaming with the light of candles, whitecloth, silver samovar, and transparent china tea things.
The hostess sat down at the table and took off her gloves. Chairs wereset with the aid of footmen, moving almost imperceptibly about the room;the party settled itself, divided into two groups: one round the samovarnear the hostess, the other at the opposite end of the drawing room,round the handsome wife of an ambassador, in black velvet, with sharplydefined black eyebrows. In both groups conversation wavered, as italways does, for the first few minutes, broken up by meetings,greetings, offers of tea, and as it were, feeling about for something torest upon.
"She’s exceptionally good as an actress; one can see she’s studiedKaulbach," said a diplomatic attache in the group round the ambassador’swife. "Did you notice how she fell down?..."
"Oh, please, don’t let us talk about Nilsson! No one can possibly sayanything new about her," said a fat, red-faced, flaxen-headed lady,without eyebrows and chignon, wearing an old silk dress. This wasPrincess Myakaya, noted for her simplicity and the roughness of hermanners, and nicknamed _enfant terrible_. Princess Myakaya, sitting inthe middle between the two groups, and listening to both, took part inthe conversation first of one and then of the other. "Three people haveused that very phrase about Kaulbach to me today already, just as thoughthey had made a compact about it. And I can’t see why they liked thatremark so."
The conversation was cut short by this observation, and a new subjecthad to be thought of again.
"Do tell me something amusing but not spiteful," said the ambassador’swife, a great proficient in the art of that elegant conversation calledby the English, _small talk_. She addressed the attache, who was at aloss now what to begin upon.
"They say that that’s a difficult task, that nothing’s amusing thatisn’t spiteful," he began with a smile. "But I’ll try. Get me a subject.It all lies in the subject. If a subject’s given me, it’s easy to spinsomething round it. I often think that the celebrated talkers of thelast century would have found it difficult to talk cleverly now.Everything clever is so stale..."
"That has been said long ago," the ambassador’s wife interrupted him,laughing.
The conversation began amiably, but just because it was too amiable, itcame to a stop again. They had to have recourse to the sure,never-failing topic—gossip.
"Don’t you think there’s something Louis Quinze about Tushkevitch?" hesaid, glancing towards a handsome, fair-haired young man, standing atthe table.
"Oh, yes! He’s in the same style as the drawing room and that’s why itis he’s so often here."
This conversation was maintained, since it rested on allusions to whatcould not be talked of in that room—that is to say, of the relations ofTushkevitch with their hostess.
Round the samovar and the hostess the conversation had been meanwhilevacillating in just the same way between three inevitable topics: thelatest piece of public news, the theater, and scandal. It, too, camefinally to rest on the last topic, that is, ill-natured gossip.
"Have you heard the Maltishtcheva woman—the mother, not the daughter—hasordered a costume in _diable rose_ color?"
"Nonsense! No, that’s too lovely!"
"I wonder that with her sense—for she’s not a fool, you know—that shedoesn’t see how funny she is."
Everyone had something to say in censure or ridicule of the lucklessMadame Maltishtcheva, and the conversation crackled merrily, like aburning faggot-stack.
The husband of Princess Betsy, a good-natured fat man, an ardentcollector of engravings, hearing that his wife had visitors, came intothe drawing room before going to his club. Stepping noiselessly over thethick rugs, he went up to Princess Myakaya.
"How did you like Nilsson?" he asked.
"Oh, how can you steal upon anyone like that! How you startled me!" sheresponded. "Please don’t talk to me about the opera; you know nothingabout music. I’d better meet you on your own ground, and talk about yourmajolica and engravings. Come now, what treasure have you been buyinglately at the old curiosity shops?"
"Would you like me to show you? But you don’t understand such things."
"Oh, do show me! I’ve been learning about them at those—what’s theirnames?... the bankers ... they’ve some splendid engravings. They showedthem to us."
"Why, have you been at the Schützburgs?" asked the hostess from thesamovar.
"Yes, _ma chère_. They asked my husband and me to dinner, and told usthe sauce at that dinner cost a hundred pounds," Princess Myakaya said,speaking loudly, and conscious everyone was listening; "and very nastysauce it was, some green mess. We had to ask them, and I made them saucefor eighteen pence, and everybody was very much pleased with it. I can’trun to hundred-pound sauces."
"She’s unique!" said the lady of the house.
"Marvelous!" said someone.
The sensation produced by Princess Myakaya’s speeches was always unique,and the secret of the sensation she produced lay in the fact that thoughshe spoke not always appropriately, as now, she said simple things withsome sense in them. In the society in which she lived such plainstatements produced the effect of the wittiest epigram. Princess Myakayacould never see why it had that effect, but she knew it had, and tookadvantage of it.
As everyone had been listening while Princess Myakaya spoke, and so theconversation around the ambassador’s wife had dropped, Princess Betsytried to bring the whole party together, and turned to the ambassador’swife.
"Will you really not have tea? You should come over here by us."
"No, we’re very happy here," the ambassador’s wife responded with asmile, and she went on with the conversation that had been begun.
It was a very agreeable conversation. They were criticizing theKarenins, husband and wife.
"Anna is quite changed since her stay in Moscow. There’s somethingstrange about her," said her friend.
"The great change is that she brought back with her the shadow of AlexeyVronsky," said the ambassador’s wife.
"Well, what of it? There’s a fable of Grimm’s about a man without ashadow, a man who’s lost his shadow. And that’s his punishment forsomething. I never could understand how it was a punishment. But a womanmust dislike being without a shadow."
"Yes, but women with a shadow usually come to a bad end," said Anna’sfriend.
"Bad luck to your tongue!" said Princess Myakaya suddenly. "MadameKarenina’s a splendid woman. I don’t like her husband, but I like hervery much."
"Why don’t you like her husband? He’s such a remarkable man," said theambassador’s wife. "My husband says there are few statesmen like him inEurope."
"And my husband tells me just the same, but I don’t believe it," saidPrincess Myakaya. "If our husbands didn’t talk to us, we should see thefacts as they are. Alexey Alexandrovitch, to my thinking, is simply afool. I say it in a whisper ... but doesn’t it really make everythingclear? Before, when I was told to consider him clever, I kept lookingfor his ability, and thought myself a fool for not seeing it; butdirectly I said, _he’s a fool,_ though only in a whisper, everything’sexplained, isn’t it?"
"How spiteful you are today!"
"Not a bit. I’d no other way out of it. One of the two had to be a fool.And, well, you know one can’t say that of oneself."
"‘No one is satisfied with his fortune, and everyone is satisfied withhis wit.’" The attaché repeated the French saying.
"That’s just it, just it," Princess Myakaya turned to him. "But thepoint is that I won’t abandon Anna to your mercies. She’s so nice, socharming. How can she help it if they’re all in love with her, andfollow her about like shadows?"
"Oh, I had no idea of blaming her for it," Anna’s friend said inself-defense.
"If no one follows us about like a shadow, that’s no proof that we’veany right to blame her."
And having duly disposed of Anna’s friend, the Princess Myakaya got up,and together with the ambassador’s wife, joined the group at the table,where the conversation was dealing with the king of Prussia.
"What wicked gossip were you talking over there?" asked Betsy.
"About the Karenins. The princess gave us a sketch of AlexeyAlexandrovitch," said the ambassador’s wife with a smile, as she satdown at the table.
"Pity we didn’t hear it!" said Princess Betsy, glancing towards thedoor. "Ah, here you are at last!" she said, turning with a smile toVronsky, as he came in.
Vronsky was not merely acquainted with all the persons whom he wasmeeting here; he saw them all every day; and so he came in with thequiet manner with which one enters a room full of people from whom onehas only just parted.
"Where do I come from?" he said, in answer to a question from theambassador’s wife. "Well, there’s no help for it, I must confess. Fromthe _opera bouffé_. I do believe I’ve seen it a hundred times, andalways with fresh enjoyment. It’s exquisite! I know it’s disgraceful,but I go to sleep at the opera, and I sit out the _opera bouffé_ to thelast minute, and enjoy it. This evening..."
He mentioned a French actress, and was going to tell something abouther; but the ambassador’s wife, with playful horror, cut him short.
"Please don’t tell us about that horror."
"All right, I won’t especially as everyone knows those horrors."
"And we should all go to see them if it were accepted as the correctthing, like the opera," chimed in Princess Myakaya.


Chapter 7

Steps were heard at the door, and Princess Betsy, knowing it was MadameKarenina, glanced at Vronsky. He was looking towards the door, and hisface wore a strange new expression. Joyfully, intently, and at the sametime timidly, he gazed at the approaching figure, and slowly he rose tohis feet. Anna walked into the drawing room. Holding herself extremelyerect, as always, looking straight before her, and moving with herswift, resolute, and light step, that distinguished her from all othersociety women, she crossed the short space to her hostess, shook handswith her, smiled, and with the same smile looked around at Vronsky.Vronsky bowed low and pushed a chair up for her.
She acknowledged this only by a slight nod, flushed a little, andfrowned. But immediately, while rapidly greeting her acquaintances, andshaking the hands proffered to her, she addressed Princess Betsy:
"I have been at Countess Lidia’s, and meant to have come here earlier,but I stayed on. Sir John was there. He’s very interesting."
"Oh, that’s this missionary?"
"Yes; he told us about the life in India, most interesting things."
The conversation, interrupted by her coming in, flickered up again likethe light of a lamp being blown out.
"Sir John! Yes, Sir John; I’ve seen him. He speaks well. The Vlassievagirl’s quite in love with him."
"And is it true the younger Vlassieva girl’s to marry Topov?"
"Yes, they say it’s quite a settled thing."
"I wonder at the parents! They say it’s a marriage for love."
"For love? What antediluvian notions you have! Can one talk of love inthese days?" said the ambassador’s wife.
"What’s to be done? It’s a foolish old fashion that’s kept up still,"said Vronsky.
"So much the worse for those who keep up the fashion. The only happymarriages I know are marriages of prudence."
"Yes, but then how often the happiness of these prudent marriages fliesaway like dust just because that passion turns up that they have refusedto recognize," said Vronsky.
"But by marriages of prudence we mean those in which both parties havesown their wild oats already. That’s like scarlatina—one has to gothrough it and get it over."
"Then they ought to find out how to vaccinate for love, like smallpox."
"I was in love in my young days with a deacon," said the PrincessMyakaya. "I don’t know that it did me any good."
"No; I imagine, joking apart, that to know love, one must make mistakesand then correct them," said Princess Betsy.
"Even after marriage?" said the ambassador’s wife playfully.
"‘It’s never too late to mend.’" The attaché repeated the Englishproverb.
"Just so," Betsy agreed; "one must make mistakes and correct them. Whatdo you think about it?" she turned to Anna, who, with a faintlyperceptible resolute smile on her lips, was listening in silence to theconversation.
"I think," said Anna, playing with the glove she had taken off, "I think... of so many men, so many minds, certainly so many hearts, so manykinds of love."
Vronsky was gazing at Anna, and with a fainting heart waiting for whatshe would say. He sighed as after a danger escaped when she utteredthese words.
Anna suddenly turned to him.
"Oh, I have had a letter from Moscow. They write me that KittyShtcherbatskaya’s very ill."
"Really?" said Vronsky, knitting his brows.
Anna looked sternly at him.
"That doesn’t interest you?"
"On the contrary, it does, very much. What was it exactly they told you,if I may know?" he questioned.
Anna got up and went to Betsy.
"Give me a cup of tea," she said, standing at her table.
While Betsy was pouring out the tea, Vronsky went up to Anna.
"What is it they write to you?" he repeated.
"I often think men have no understanding of what’s not honorable thoughthey’re always talking of it," said Anna, without answering him. "I’vewanted to tell you so a long while," she added, and moving a few stepsaway, she sat down at a table in a corner covered with albums.
"I don’t quite understand the meaning of your words," he said, handingher the cup.
She glanced towards the sofa beside her, and he instantly sat down.
"Yes, I have been wanting to tell you," she said, not looking at him."You behaved wrongly, very wrongly."
"Do you suppose I don’t know that I’ve acted wrongly? But who was thecause of my doing so?"
"What do you say that to me for?" she said, glancing severely at him.
"You know what for," he answered boldly and joyfully, meeting her glanceand not dropping his eyes.
Not he, but she, was confused.
"That only shows you have no heart," she said. But her eyes said thatshe knew he had a heart, and that was why she was afraid of him.
"What you spoke of just now was a mistake, and not love."
"Remember that I have forbidden you to utter that word, that hatefulword," said Anna, with a shudder. But at once she felt that by that veryword "forbidden" she had shown that she acknowledged certain rights overhim, and by that very fact was encouraging him to speak of love. "I havelong meant to tell you this," she went on, looking resolutely into hiseyes, and hot all over from the burning flush on her cheeks. "I’ve comeon purpose this evening, knowing I should meet you. I have come to tellyou that this must end. I have never blushed before anyone, and youforce me to feel to blame for something."
He looked at her and was struck by a new spiritual beauty in her face.
"What do you wish of me?" he said simply and seriously.
"I want you to go to Moscow and ask for Kitty’s forgiveness," she said.
"You don’t wish that?" he said.
He saw she was saying what she forced herself to say, not what shewanted to say.
"If you love me, as you say," she whispered, "do so that I may be atpeace."
His face grew radiant.
"Don’t you know that you’re all my life to me? But I know no peace, andI can’t give it to you; all myself—and love ... yes. I can’t think ofyou and myself apart. You and I are one to me. And I see no chancebefore us of peace for me or for you. I see a chance of despair, ofwretchedness ... or I see a chance of bliss, what bliss!... Can it bethere’s no chance of it?" he murmured with his lips; but she heard.
She strained every effort of her mind to say what ought to be said. Butinstead of that she let her eyes rest on him, full of love, and made noanswer.
"It’s come!" he thought in ecstasy. "When I was beginning to despair,and it seemed there would be no end—it’s come! She loves me! She ownsit!"
"Then do this for me: never say such things to me, and let us befriends," she said in words; but her eyes spoke quite differently.
"Friends we shall never be, you know that yourself. Whether we shall bethe happiest or the wretchedest of people—that’s in your hands."
She would have said something, but he interrupted her.
"I ask one thing only: I ask for the right to hope, to suffer as I do.But if even that cannot be, command me to disappear, and I disappear.You shall not see me if my presence is distasteful to you."
"I don’t want to drive you away."
"Only don’t change anything, leave everything as it is," he said in ashaky voice. "Here’s your husband."
At that instant Alexey Alexandrovitch did in fact walk into the roomwith his calm, awkward gait.
Glancing at his wife and Vronsky, he went up to the lady of the house,and sitting down for a cup of tea, began talking in his deliberate,always audible voice, in his habitual tone of banter, ridiculingsomeone.
"Your Rambouillet is in full conclave," he said, looking round at allthe party; "the graces and the muses."
But Princess Betsy could not endure that tone of his—"sneering," as shecalled it, using the English word, and like a skillful hostess she atonce brought him into a serious conversation on the subject of universalconscription. Alexey Alexandrovitch was immediately interested in thesubject, and began seriously defending the new imperial decree againstPrincess Betsy, who had attacked it.
Vronsky and Anna still sat at the little table.
"This is getting indecorous," whispered one lady, with an expressiveglance at Madame Karenina, Vronsky, and her husband.
"What did I tell you?" said Anna’s friend.
But not only those ladies, almost everyone in the room, even thePrincess Myakaya and Betsy herself, looked several times in thedirection of the two who had withdrawn from the general circle, asthough that were a disturbing fact. Alexey Alexandrovitch was the onlyperson who did not once look in that direction, and was not divertedfrom the interesting discussion he had entered upon.
Noticing the disagreeable impression that was being made on everyone,Princess Betsy slipped someone else into her place to listen to AlexeyAlexandrovitch, and went up to Anna.
"I’m always amazed at the clearness and precision of your husband’slanguage," she said. "The most transcendental ideas seem to be within mygrasp when he’s speaking."
"Oh, yes!" said Anna, radiant with a smile of happiness, and notunderstanding a word of what Betsy had said. She crossed over to the bigtable and took part in the general conversation.
Alexey Alexandrovitch, after staying half an hour, went up to his wifeand suggested that they should go home together. But she answered, notlooking at him, that she was staying to supper. Alexey Alexandrovitchmade his bows and withdrew.
The fat old Tatar, Madame Karenina’s coachman, was with difficultyholding one of her pair of grays, chilled with the cold and rearing atthe entrance. A footman stood opening the carriage door. The hall porterstood holding open the great door of the house. Anna Arkadyevna, withher quick little hand, was unfastening the lace of her sleeve, caught inthe hook of her fur cloak, and with bent head listening to the wordsVronsky murmured as he escorted her down.
"You’ve said nothing, of course, and I ask nothing," he was saying; "butyou know that friendship’s not what I want: that there’s only onehappiness in life for me, that word that you dislike so ... yes,love!..."
"Love," she repeated slowly, in an inner voice, and suddenly, at thevery instant she unhooked the lace, she added, "Why I don’t like theword is that it means too much to me, far more than you can understand,"and she glanced into his face. "_Au revoir!_"
She gave him her hand, and with her rapid, springy step she passed bythe porter and vanished into the carriage.
Her glance, the touch of her hand, set him aflame. He kissed the palm ofhis hand where she had touched it, and went home, happy in the sensethat he had got nearer to the attainment of his aims that evening thanduring the last two months.


Chapter 8

Alexey Alexandrovitch had seen nothing striking or improper in the factthat his wife was sitting with Vronsky at a table apart, in eagerconversation with him about something. But he noticed that to the restof the party this appeared something striking and improper, and for thatreason it seemed to him too to be improper. He made up his mind that hemust speak of it to his wife.
On reaching home Alexey Alexandrovitch went to his study, as he usuallydid, seated himself in his low chair, opened a book on the Papacy at theplace where he had laid the paper-knife in it, and read till oneo’clock, just as he usually did. But from time to time he rubbed hishigh forehead and shook his head, as though to drive away something. Athis usual time he got up and made his toilet for the night. AnnaArkadyevna had not yet come in. With a book under his arm he wentupstairs. But this evening, instead of his usual thoughts andmeditations upon official details, his thoughts were absorbed by hiswife and something disagreeable connected with her. Contrary to hisusual habit, he did not get into bed, but fell to walking up and downthe rooms with his hands clasped behind his back. He could not go tobed, feeling that it was absolutely needful for him first to thinkthoroughly over the position that had just arisen.
When Alexey Alexandrovitch had made up his mind that he must talk to hiswife about it, it had seemed a very easy and simple matter. But now,when he began to think over the question that had just presented itself,it seemed to him very complicated and difficult.
Alexey Alexandrovitch was not jealous. Jealousy according to his notionswas an insult to one’s wife, and one ought to have confidence in one’swife. Why one ought to have confidence—that is to say, completeconviction that his young wife would always love him—he did not askhimself. But he had no experience of lack of confidence, because he hadconfidence in her, and told himself that he ought to have it. Now,though his conviction that jealousy was a shameful feeling and that oneought to feel confidence, had not broken down, he felt that he wasstanding face to face with something illogical and irrational, and didnot know what was to be done. Alexey Alexandrovitch was standing face toface with life, with the possibility of his wife’s loving someone otherthan himself, and this seemed to him very irrational andincomprehensible because it was life itself. All his life AlexeyAlexandrovitch had lived and worked in official spheres, having to dowith the reflection of life. And every time he had stumbled against lifeitself he had shrunk away from it. Now he experienced a feeling akin tothat of a man who, while calmly crossing a precipice by a bridge, shouldsuddenly discover that the bridge is broken, and that there is a chasmbelow. That chasm was life itself, the bridge that artificial life inwhich Alexey Alexandrovitch had lived. For the first time the questionpresented itself to him of the possibility of his wife’s loving someoneelse, and he was horrified at it.
He did not undress, but walked up and down with his regular tread overthe resounding parquet of the dining room, where one lamp was burning,over the carpet of the dark drawing room, in which the light wasreflected on the big new portrait of himself hanging over the sofa, andacross her boudoir, where two candles burned, lighting up the portraitsof her parents and woman friends, and the pretty knick-knacks of herwriting table, that he knew so well. He walked across her boudoir to thebedroom door, and turned back again. At each turn in his walk,especially at the parquet of the lighted dining room, he halted and saidto himself, "Yes, this I must decide and put a stop to; I must expressmy view of it and my decision." And he turned back again. "But expresswhat—what decision?" he said to himself in the drawing room, and hefound no reply. "But after all," he asked himself before turning intothe boudoir, "what has occurred? Nothing. She was talking a long whilewith him. But what of that? Surely women in society can talk to whomthey please. And then, jealousy means lowering both myself and her," hetold himself as he went into her boudoir; but this dictum, which hadalways had such weight with him before, had now no weight and no meaningat all. And from the bedroom door he turned back again; but as heentered the dark drawing room some inner voice told him that it was notso, and that if others noticed it that showed that there was something.And he said to himself again in the dining room, "Yes, I must decide andput a stop to it, and express my view of it..." And again at the turn inthe drawing room he asked himself, "Decide how?" And again he askedhimself, "What had occurred?" and answered, "Nothing," and recollectedthat jealousy was a feeling insulting to his wife; but again in thedrawing room he was convinced that something had happened. His thoughts,like his body, went round a complete circle, without coming uponanything new. He noticed this, rubbed his forehead, and sat down in herboudoir.
There, looking at her table, with the malachite blotting case lying atthe top and an unfinished letter, his thoughts suddenly changed. Hebegan to think of her, of what she was thinking and feeling. For thefirst time he pictured vividly to himself her personal life, her ideas,her desires, and the idea that she could and should have a separate lifeof her own seemed to him so alarming that he made haste to dispel it. Itwas the chasm which he was afraid to peep into. To put himself inthought and feeling in another person’s place was a spiritual exercisenot natural to Alexey Alexandrovitch. He looked on this spiritualexercise as a harmful and dangerous abuse of the fancy.
"And the worst of it all," thought he, "is that just now, at the verymoment when my great work is approaching completion" (he was thinking ofthe project he was bringing forward at the time), "when I stand in needof all my mental peace and all my energies, just now this stupid worryshould fall foul of me. But what’s to be done? I’m not one of those menwho submit to uneasiness and worry without having the force of characterto face them.
"I must think it over, come to a decision, and put it out of my mind,"he said aloud.
"The question of her feelings, of what has passed and may be passing inher soul, that’s not my affair; that’s the affair of her conscience, andfalls under the head of religion," he said to himself, feelingconsolation in the sense that he had found to which division ofregulating principles this new circumstance could be properly referred.
"And so," Alexey Alexandrovitch said to himself, "questions as to herfeelings, and so on, are questions for her conscience, with which I canhave nothing to do. My duty is clearly defined. As the head of thefamily, I am a person bound in duty to guide her, and consequently, inpart the person responsible; I am bound to point out the danger Iperceive, to warn her, even to use my authority. I ought to speakplainly to her." And everything that he would say tonight to his wifetook clear shape in Alexey Alexandrovitch’s head. Thinking over what hewould say, he somewhat regretted that he should have to use his time andmental powers for domestic consumption, with so little to show for it,but, in spite of that, the form and contents of the speech before himshaped itself as clearly and distinctly in his head as a ministerialreport.
"I must say and express fully the following points: first, exposition ofthe value to be attached to public opinion and to decorum; secondly,exposition of religious significance of marriage; thirdly, if need be,reference to the calamity possibly ensuing to our son; fourthly,reference to the unhappiness likely to result to herself." And,interlacing his fingers, Alexey Alexandrovitch stretched them, and thejoints of the fingers cracked. This trick, a bad habit, the cracking ofhis fingers, always soothed him, and gave precision to his thoughts, soneedful to him at this juncture.
There was the sound of a carriage driving up to the front door. AlexeyAlexandrovitch halted in the middle of the room.
A woman’s step was heard mounting the stairs. Alexey Alexandrovitch,ready for his speech, stood compressing his crossed fingers, waiting tosee if the crack would not come again. One joint cracked.
Already, from the sound of light steps on the stairs, he was aware thatshe was close, and though he was satisfied with his speech, he feltfrightened of the explanation confronting him...


Chapter 9

Anna came in with hanging head, playing with the tassels of her hood.Her face was brilliant and glowing; but this glow was not one ofbrightness; it suggested the fearful glow of a conflagration in themidst of a dark night. On seeing her husband, Anna raised her head andsmiled, as though she had just waked up.
"You’re not in bed? What a wonder!" she said, letting fall her hood, andwithout stopping, she went on into the dressing room. "It’s late, AlexeyAlexandrovitch," she said, when she had gone through the doorway.
"Anna, it’s necessary for me to have a talk with you."
"With me?" she said, wonderingly. She came out from behind the door ofthe dressing room, and looked at him. "Why, what is it? What about?" sheasked, sitting down. "Well, let’s talk, if it’s so necessary. But itwould be better to get to sleep."
Anna said what came to her lips, and marveled, hearing herself, at herown capacity for lying. How simple and natural were her words, and howlikely that she was simply sleepy! She felt herself clad in animpenetrable armor of falsehood. She felt that some unseen force hadcome to her aid and was supporting her.
"Anna, I must warn you," he began.
"Warn me?" she said. "Of what?"
She looked at him so simply, so brightly, that anyone who did not knowher as her husband knew her could not have noticed anything unnatural,either in the sound or the sense of her words. But to him, knowing her,knowing that whenever he went to bed five minutes later than usual, shenoticed it, and asked him the reason; to him, knowing that every joy,every pleasure and pain that she felt she communicated to him at once;to him, now to see that she did not care to notice his state of mind,that she did not care to say a word about herself, meant a great deal.He saw that the inmost recesses of her soul, that had always hithertolain open before him, were closed against him. More than that, he sawfrom her tone that she was not even perturbed at that, but as it weresaid straight out to him: "Yes, it’s shut up, and so it must be, andwill be in future." Now he experienced a feeling such as a man mighthave, returning home and finding his own house locked up. "But perhapsthe key may yet be found," thought Alexey Alexandrovitch.
"I want to warn you," he said in a low voice, "that throughthoughtlessness and lack of caution you may cause yourself to be talkedabout in society. Your too animated conversation this evening with CountVronsky" (he enunciated the name firmly and with deliberate emphasis)"attracted attention."
He talked and looked at her laughing eyes, which frightened him now withtheir impenetrable look, and, as he talked, he felt all the uselessnessand idleness of his words.
"You’re always like that," she answered, as though completelymisapprehending him, and of all he had said only taking in the lastphrase. "One time you don’t like my being dull, and another time youdon’t like my being lively. I wasn’t dull. Does that offend you?"
Alexey Alexandrovitch shivered, and bent his hands to make the jointscrack.
"Oh, please, don’t do that, I do so dislike it," she said.
"Anna, is this you?" said Alexey Alexandrovitch, quietly making aneffort over himself, and restraining the motion of his fingers.
"But what is it all about?" she said, with such genuine and drollwonder. "What do you want of me?"
Alexey Alexandrovitch paused, and rubbed his forehead and his eyes. Hesaw that instead of doing as he had intended—that is to say, warning hiswife against a mistake in the eyes of the world—he had unconsciouslybecome agitated over what was the affair of her conscience, and wasstruggling against the barrier he fancied between them.
"This is what I meant to say to you," he went on coldly and composedly,"and I beg you to listen to it. I consider jealousy, as you know, ahumiliating and degrading feeling, and I shall never allow myself to beinfluenced by it; but there are certain rules of decorum which cannot bedisregarded with impunity. This evening it was not I observed it, butjudging by the impression made on the company, everyone observed thatyour conduct and deportment were not altogether what could be desired."
"I positively don’t understand," said Anna, shrugging her shoulders—"Hedoesn’t care," she thought. "But other people noticed it, and that’swhat upsets him."—"You’re not well, Alexey Alexandrovitch," she added,and she got up, and would have gone towards the door; but he movedforward as though he would stop her.
His face was ugly and forbidding, as Anna had never seen him. Shestopped, and bending her head back and on one side, began with her rapidhand taking out her hairpins.
"Well, I’m listening to what’s to come," she said, calmly andironically; "and indeed I listen with interest, for I should like tounderstand what’s the matter."
She spoke, and marveled at the confident, calm, and natural tone inwhich she was speaking, and the choice of the words she used.
"To enter into all the details of your feelings I have no right, andbesides, I regard that as useless and even harmful," began AlexeyAlexandrovitch. "Ferreting in one’s soul, one often ferrets outsomething that might have lain there unnoticed. Your feelings are anaffair of your own conscience; but I am in duty bound to you, to myself,and to God, to point out to you your duties. Our life has been joined,not by man, but by God. That union can only be severed by a crime, and acrime of that nature brings its own chastisement."
"I don’t understand a word. And, oh dear! how sleepy I am, unluckily,"she said, rapidly passing her hand through her hair, feeling for theremaining hairpins.
"Anna, for God’s sake don’t speak like that!" he said gently. "Perhaps Iam mistaken, but believe me, what I say, I say as much for myself as foryou. I am your husband, and I love you."
For an instant her face fell, and the mocking gleam in her eyes diedaway; but the word _love_ threw her into revolt again. She thought:"Love? Can he love? If he hadn’t heard there was such a thing as love,he would never have used the word. He doesn’t even know what love is."
"Alexey Alexandrovitch, really I don’t understand," she said. "Definewhat it is you find..."
"Pardon, let me say all I have to say. I love you. But I am not speakingof myself; the most important persons in this matter are our son andyourself. It may very well be, I repeat, that my words seem to youutterly unnecessary and out of place; it may be that they are calledforth by my mistaken impression. In that case, I beg you to forgive me.But if you are conscious yourself of even the smallest foundation forthem, then I beg you to think a little, and if your heart prompts you,to speak out to me..."
Alexey Alexandrovitch was unconsciously saying something utterly unlikewhat he had prepared.
"I have nothing to say. And besides," she said hurriedly, withdifficulty repressing a smile, "it’s really time to be in bed."
Alexey Alexandrovitch sighed, and, without saying more, went into thebedroom.
When she came into the bedroom, he was already in bed. His lips weresternly compressed, and his eyes looked away from her. Anna got into herbed, and lay expecting every minute that he would begin to speak to heragain. She both feared his speaking and wished for it. But he wassilent. She waited for a long while without moving, and had forgottenabout him. She thought of that other; she pictured him, and felt how herheart was flooded with emotion and guilty delight at the thought of him.Suddenly she heard an even, tranquil snore. For the first instant AlexeyAlexandrovitch seemed, as it were, appalled at his own snoring, andceased; but after an interval of two breathings the snore sounded again,with a new tranquil rhythm.
"It’s late, it’s late," she whispered with a smile. A long while shelay, not moving, with open eyes, whose brilliance she almost fancied shecould herself see in the darkness.


Chapter 10

From that time a new life began for Alexey Alexandrovitch and for hiswife. Nothing special happened. Anna went out into society, as she hadalways done, was particularly often at Princess Betsy’s, and met Vronskyeverywhere. Alexey Alexandrovitch saw this, but could do nothing. Allhis efforts to draw her into open discussion she confronted with abarrier which he could not penetrate, made up of a sort of amusedperplexity. Outwardly everything was the same, but their inner relationswere completely changed. Alexey Alexandrovitch, a man of great power inthe world of politics, felt himself helpless in this. Like an ox withhead bent, submissively he awaited the blow which he felt was liftedover him. Every time he began to think about it, he felt that he musttry once more, that by kindness, tenderness, and persuasion there wasstill hope of saving her, of bringing her back to herself, and every dayhe made ready to talk to her. But every time he began talking to her, hefelt that the spirit of evil and deceit, which had taken possession ofher, had possession of him too, and he talked to her in a tone quiteunlike that in which he had meant to talk. Involuntarily he talked toher in his habitual tone of jeering at anyone who should say what he wassaying. And in that tone it was impossible to say what needed to be saidto her.


Chapter 11

That which for Vronsky had been almost a whole year the one absorbingdesire of his life, replacing all his old desires; that which for Annahad been an impossible, terrible, and even for that reason moreentrancing dream of bliss, that desire had been fulfilled. He stoodbefore her, pale, his lower jaw quivering, and besought her to be calm,not knowing how or why.
"Anna! Anna!" he said with a choking voice, "Anna, for pity’s sake!..."
But the louder he spoke, the lower she dropped her once proud and gay,now shame-stricken head, and she bowed down and sank from the sofa whereshe was sitting, down on the floor, at his feet; she would have fallenon the carpet if he had not held her.
"My God! Forgive me!" she said, sobbing, pressing his hands to herbosom.
She felt so sinful, so guilty, that nothing was left her but tohumiliate herself and beg forgiveness; and as now there was no one inher life but him, to him she addressed her prayer for forgiveness.Looking at him, she had a physical sense of her humiliation, and shecould say nothing more. He felt what a murderer must feel, when he seesthe body he has robbed of life. That body, robbed by him of life, wastheir love, the first stage of their love. There was something awful andrevolting in the memory of what had been bought at this fearful price ofshame. Shame at their spiritual nakedness crushed her and infected him.But in spite of all the murderer’s horror before the body of his victim,he must hack it to pieces, hide the body, must use what he has gained byhis murder.
And with fury, as it were with passion, the murderer falls on the body,and drags it and hacks at it; so he covered her face and shoulders withkisses. She held his hand, and did not stir. "Yes, these kisses—that iswhat has been bought by this shame. Yes, and one hand, which will alwaysbe mine—the hand of my accomplice." She lifted up that hand and kissedit. He sank on his knees and tried to see her face; but she hid it, andsaid nothing. At last, as though making an effort over herself, she gotup and pushed him away. Her face was still as beautiful, but it was onlythe more pitiful for that.
"All is over," she said; "I have nothing but you. Remember that."
"I can never forget what is my whole life. For one instant of thishappiness..."
"Happiness!" she said with horror and loathing and her horrorunconsciously infected him. "For pity’s sake, not a word, not a wordmore."
She rose quickly and moved away from him.
"Not a word more," she repeated, and with a look of chill despair,incomprehensible to him, she parted from him. She felt that at thatmoment she could not put into words the sense of shame, of rapture, andof horror at this stepping into a new life, and she did not want tospeak of it, to vulgarize this feeling by inappropriate words. But latertoo, and the next day and the third day, she still found no words inwhich she could express the complexity of her feelings; indeed, shecould not even find thoughts in which she could clearly think out allthat was in her soul.
She said to herself: "No, just now I can’t think of it, later on, when Iam calmer." But this calm for thought never came; every time the thoughtrose of what she had done and what would happen to her, and what sheought to do, a horror came over her and she drove those thoughts away.
"Later, later," she said—"when I am calmer."
But in dreams, when she had no control over her thoughts, her positionpresented itself to her in all its hideous nakedness. One dream hauntedher almost every night. She dreamed that both were her husbands at once,that both were lavishing caresses on her. Alexey Alexandrovitch wasweeping, kissing her hands, and saying, "How happy we are now!" AndAlexey Vronsky was there too, and he too was her husband. And she wasmarveling that it had once seemed impossible to her, was explaining tothem, laughing, that this was ever so much simpler, and that now both ofthem were happy and contented. But this dream weighed on her like anightmare, and she awoke from it in terror.


Chapter 12

In the early days after his return from Moscow, whenever Levin shudderedand grew red, remembering the disgrace of his rejection, he said tohimself: "This was just how I used to shudder and blush, thinking myselfutterly lost, when I was plucked in physics and did not get my remove;and how I thought myself utterly ruined after I had mismanaged thataffair of my sister’s that was entrusted to me. And yet, now that yearshave passed, I recall it and wonder that it could distress me so much.It will be the same thing too with this trouble. Time will go by and Ishall not mind about this either."
But three months had passed and he had not left off minding about it;and it was as painful for him to think of it as it had been those firstdays. He could not be at peace because after dreaming so long of familylife, and feeling himself so ripe for it, he was still not married, andwas further than ever from marriage. He was painfully conscious himself,as were all about him, that at his years it is not well for man to bealone. He remembered how before starting for Moscow he had once said tohis cowman Nikolay, a simple-hearted peasant, whom he liked talking to:"Well, Nikolay! I mean to get married," and how Nikolay had promptlyanswered, as of a matter on which there could be no possible doubt: "Andhigh time too, Konstantin Demitrievitch." But marriage had now becomefurther off than ever. The place was taken, and whenever he tried toimagine any of the girls he knew in that place, he felt that it wasutterly impossible. Moreover, the recollection of the rejection and thepart he had played in the affair tortured him with shame. However oftenhe told himself that he was in no wise to blame in it, thatrecollection, like other humiliating reminiscences of a similar kind,made him twinge and blush. There had been in his past, as in everyman’s, actions, recognized by him as bad, for which his conscience oughtto have tormented him; but the memory of these evil actions was far fromcausing him so much suffering as those trivial but humiliatingreminiscences. These wounds never healed. And with these memories wasnow ranged his rejection and the pitiful position in which he must haveappeared to others that evening. But time and work did their part.Bitter memories were more and more covered up by the incidents—paltry inhis eyes, but really important—of his country life. Every week hethought less often of Kitty. He was impatiently looking forward to thenews that she was married, or just going to be married, hoping that suchnews would, like having a tooth out, completely cure him.
Meanwhile spring came on, beautiful and kindly, without the delays andtreacheries of spring,—one of those rare springs in which plants,beasts, and man rejoice alike. This lovely spring roused Levin stillmore, and strengthened him in his resolution of renouncing all his pastand building up his lonely life firmly and independently. Though many ofthe plans with which he had returned to the country had not been carriedout, still his most important resolution—that of purity—had been kept byhim. He was free from that shame, which had usually harassed him after afall; and he could look everyone straight in the face. In February hehad received a letter from Marya Nikolaevna telling him that his brotherNikolay’s health was getting worse, but that he would not take advice,and in consequence of this letter Levin went to Moscow to his brother’sand succeeded in persuading him to see a doctor and to go to awatering-place abroad. He succeeded so well in persuading his brother,and in lending him money for the journey without irritating him, that hewas satisfied with himself in that matter. In addition to his farming,which called for special attention in spring, and in addition toreading, Levin had begun that winter a work on agriculture, the plan ofwhich turned on taking into account the character of the laborer on theland as one of the unalterable data of the question, like the climateand the soil, and consequently deducing all the principles of scientificculture, not simply from the data of soil and climate, but from the dataof soil, climate, and a certain unalterable character of the laborer.Thus, in spite of his solitude, or in consequence of his solitude, hislife was exceedingly full. Only rarely he suffered from an unsatisfieddesire to communicate his stray ideas to someone besides AgafeaMihalovna. With her indeed he not infrequently fell into discussion uponphysics, the theory of agriculture, and especially philosophy;philosophy was Agafea Mihalovna’s favorite subject.
Spring was slow in unfolding. For the last few weeks it had beensteadily fine frosty weather. In the daytime it thawed in the sun, butat night there were even seven degrees of frost. There was such a frozensurface on the snow that they drove the wagons anywhere off the roads.Easter came in the snow. Then all of a sudden, on Easter Monday, a warmwind sprang up, storm clouds swooped down, and for three days and threenights the warm, driving rain fell in streams. On Thursday the winddropped, and a thick gray fog brooded over the land as though hiding themysteries of the transformations that were being wrought in nature.Behind the fog there was the flowing of water, the cracking and floatingof ice, the swift rush of turbid, foaming torrents; and on the followingMonday, in the evening, the fog parted, the storm clouds split up intolittle curling crests of cloud, the sky cleared, and the real spring hadcome. In the morning the sun rose brilliant and quickly wore away thethin layer of ice that covered the water, and all the warm air wasquivering with the steam that rose up from the quickened earth. The oldgrass looked greener, and the young grass thrust up its tiny blades; thebuds of the guelder-rose and of the currant and the sticky birch-budswere swollen with sap, and an exploring bee was humming about the goldenblossoms that studded the willow. Larks trilled unseen above the velvetygreen fields and the ice-covered stubble-land; peewits wailed over thelow lands and marshes flooded by the pools; cranes and wild geese flewhigh across the sky uttering their spring calls. The cattle, bald inpatches where the new hair had not grown yet, lowed in the pastures; thebowlegged lambs frisked round their bleating mothers. Nimble childrenran about the drying paths, covered with the prints of bare feet. Therewas a merry chatter of peasant women over their linen at the pond, andthe ring of axes in the yard, where the peasants were repairing ploughsand harrows. The real spring had come.


Chapter 13

Levin put on his big boots, and, for the first time, a cloth jacket,instead of his fur cloak, and went out to look after his farm, steppingover streams of water that flashed in the sunshine and dazzled his eyes,and treading one minute on ice and the next into sticky mud.
Spring is the time of plans and projects. And, as he came out into thefarmyard, Levin, like a tree in spring that knows not what form will betaken by the young shoots and twigs imprisoned in its swelling buds,hardly knew what undertakings he was going to begin upon now in the farmwork that was so dear to him. But he felt that he was full of the mostsplendid plans and projects. First of all he went to the cattle. Thecows had been let out into their paddock, and their smooth sides werealready shining with their new, sleek, spring coats; they basked in thesunshine and lowed to go to the meadow. Levin gazed admiringly at thecows he knew so intimately to the minutest detail of their condition,and gave orders for them to be driven out into the meadow, and thecalves to be let into the paddock. The herdsman ran gaily to get readyfor the meadow. The cowherd girls, picking up their petticoats, ransplashing through the mud with bare legs, still white, not yet brownfrom the sun, waving brush wood in their hands, chasing the calves thatfrolicked in the mirth of spring.
After admiring the young ones of that year, who were particularlyfine—the early calves were the size of a peasant’s cow, and Pava’sdaughter, at three months old, was as big as a yearling—Levin gaveorders for a trough to be brought out and for them to be fed in thepaddock. But it appeared that as the paddock had not been used duringthe winter, the hurdles made in the autumn for it were broken. He sentfor the carpenter, who, according to his orders, ought to have been atwork at the thrashing machine. But it appeared that the carpenter wasrepairing the harrows, which ought to have been repaired before Lent.This was very annoying to Levin. It was annoying to come upon thateverlasting slovenliness in the farm work against which he had beenstriving with all his might for so many years. The hurdles, as heascertained, being not wanted in winter, had been carried to thecart-horses’ stable; and there broken, as they were of lightconstruction, only meant for feeding calves. Moreover, it was apparentalso that the harrows and all the agricultural implements, which he haddirected to be looked over and repaired in the winter, for which verypurpose he had hired three carpenters, had not been put into repair, andthe harrows were being repaired when they ought to have been harrowingthe field. Levin sent for his bailiff, but immediately went off himselfto look for him. The bailiff, beaming all over, like everyone that day,in a sheepskin bordered with astrachan, came out of the barn, twisting abit of straw in his hands.
"Why isn’t the carpenter at the thrashing machine?"
"Oh, I meant to tell you yesterday, the harrows want repairing. Hereit’s time they got to work in the fields."
"But what were they doing in the winter, then?"
"But what did you want the carpenter for?"
"Where are the hurdles for the calves’ paddock?"
"I ordered them to be got ready. What would you have with thosepeasants!" said the bailiff, with a wave of his hand.
"It’s not those peasants but this bailiff!" said Levin, getting angry."Why, what do I keep you for?" he cried. But, bethinking himself thatthis would not help matters, he stopped short in the middle of asentence, and merely sighed. "Well, what do you say? Can sowing begin?"he asked, after a pause.
"Behind Turkin tomorrow or the next day they might begin."
"And the clover?"
"I’ve sent Vassily and Mishka; they’re sowing. Only I don’t know ifthey’ll manage to get through; it’s so slushy."
"How many acres?"
"About fifteen."
"Why not sow all?" cried Levin.
That they were only sowing the clover on fifteen acres, not on all theforty-five, was still more annoying to him. Clover, as he knew, bothfrom books and from his own experience, never did well except when itwas sown as early as possible, almost in the snow. And yet Levin couldnever get this done.
"There’s no one to send. What would you have with such a set ofpeasants? Three haven’t turned up. And there’s Semyon..."
"Well, you should have taken some men from the thatching."
"And so I have, as it is."
"Where are the peasants, then?"
"Five are making compôte" (which meant compost), "four are shifting theoats for fear of a touch of mildew, Konstantin Dmitrievitch."
Levin knew very well that "a touch of mildew" meant that his Englishseed oats were already ruined. Again they had not done as he hadordered.
"Why, but I told you during Lent to put in pipes," he cried.
"Don’t put yourself out; we shall get it all done in time."
Levin waved his hand angrily, went into the granary to glance at theoats, and then to the stable. The oats were not yet spoiled. But thepeasants were carrying the oats in spades when they might simply letthem slide down into the lower granary; and arranging for this to bedone, and taking two workmen from there for sowing clover, Levin gotover his vexation with the bailiff. Indeed, it was such a lovely daythat one could not be angry.
"Ignat!" he called to the coachman, who, with his sleeves tucked up, waswashing the carriage wheels, "saddle me..."
"Which, sir?"
"Well, let it be Kolpik."
"Yes, sir."
While they were saddling his horse, Levin again called up the bailiff,who was hanging about in sight, to make it up with him, and begantalking to him about the spring operations before them, and his plansfor the farm.
The wagons were to begin carting manure earlier, so as to get all donebefore the early mowing. And the ploughing of the further land to go onwithout a break so as to let it ripen lying fallow. And the mowing to beall done by hired labor, not on half-profits. The bailiff listenedattentively, and obviously made an effort to approve of his employer’sprojects. But still he had that look Levin knew so well that alwaysirritated him, a look of hopelessness and despondency. That look said:"That’s all very well, but as God wills."
Nothing mortified Levin so much as that tone. But it was the tone commonto all the bailiffs he had ever had. They had all taken up that attitudeto his plans, and so now he was not angered by it, but mortified, andfelt all the more roused to struggle against this, as it seemed,elemental force continually ranged against him, for which he could findno other expression than "as God wills."
"If we can manage it, Konstantin Dmitrievitch," said the bailiff.
"Why ever shouldn’t you manage it?"
"We positively must have another fifteen laborers. And they don’t turnup. There were some here today asking seventy roubles for the summer."
Levin was silent. Again he was brought face to face with that opposingforce. He knew that however much they tried, they could not hire morethan forty—thirty-seven perhaps or thirty-eight—laborers for areasonable sum. Some forty had been taken on, and there were no more.But still he could not help struggling against it.
"Send to Sury, to Tchefirovka; if they don’t come we must look forthem."
"Oh, I’ll send, to be sure," said Vassily Fedorovitch despondently. "Butthere are the horses, too, they’re not good for much."
"We’ll get some more. I know, of course," Levin added laughing, "youalways want to do with as little and as poor quality as possible; butthis year I’m not going to let you have things your own way. I’ll see toeverything myself."
"Why, I don’t think you take much rest as it is. It cheers us up to workunder the master’s eye..."
"So they’re sowing clover behind the Birch Dale? I’ll go and have a lookat them," he said, getting on to the little bay cob, Kolpik, who was ledup by the coachman.
"You can’t get across the streams, Konstantin Dmitrievitch," thecoachman shouted.
"All right, I’ll go by the forest."
And Levin rode through the slush of the farmyard to the gate and outinto the open country, his good little horse, after his long inactivity,stepping out gallantly, snorting over the pools, and asking, as it were,for guidance. If Levin had felt happy before in the cattle pens andfarmyard, he felt happier yet in the open country. Swaying rhythmicallywith the ambling paces of his good little cob, drinking in the warm yetfresh scent of the snow and the air, as he rode through his forest overthe crumbling, wasted snow, still left in parts, and covered withdissolving tracks, he rejoiced over every tree, with the moss revivingon its bark and the buds swelling on its shoots. When he came out of theforest, in the immense plain before him, his grass fields stretched inan unbroken carpet of green, without one bare place or swamp, onlyspotted here and there in the hollows with patches of melting snow. Hewas not put out of temper even by the sight of the peasants’ horses andcolts trampling down his young grass (he told a peasant he met to drivethem out), nor by the sarcastic and stupid reply of the peasant Ipat,whom he met on the way, and asked, "Well, Ipat, shall we soon besowing?" "We must get the ploughing done first, KonstantinDmitrievitch," answered Ipat. The further he rode, the happier hebecame, and plans for the land rose to his mind each better than thelast; to plant all his fields with hedges along the southern borders, sothat the snow should not lie under them; to divide them up into sixfields of arable and three of pasture and hay; to build a cattle yard atthe further end of the estate, and to dig a pond and to constructmovable pens for the cattle as a means of manuring the land. And theneight hundred acres of wheat, three hundred of potatoes, and fourhundred of clover, and not one acre exhausted.
Absorbed in such dreams, carefully keeping his horse by the hedges, soas not to trample his young crops, he rode up to the laborers who hadbeen sent to sow clover. A cart with the seed in it was standing, not atthe edge, but in the middle of the crop, and the winter corn had beentorn up by the wheels and trampled by the horse. Both the laborers weresitting in the hedge, probably smoking a pipe together. The earth in thecart, with which the seed was mixed, was not crushed to powder, butcrusted together or adhering in clods. Seeing the master, the laborer,Vassily, went towards the cart, while Mishka set to work sowing. Thiswas not as it should be, but with the laborers Levin seldom lost histemper. When Vassily came up, Levin told him to lead the horse to thehedge.
"It’s all right, sir, it’ll spring up again," responded Vassily.
"Please don’t argue," said Levin, "but do as you’re told."
"Yes, sir," answered Vassily, and he took the horse’s head. "What asowing, Konstantin Dmitrievitch," he said, hesitating; "first rate. Onlyit’s a work to get about! You drag a ton of earth on your shoes."
"Why is it you have earth that’s not sifted?" said Levin.
"Well, we crumble it up," answered Vassily, taking up some seed androlling the earth in his palms.
Vassily was not to blame for their having filled up his cart withunsifted earth, but still it was annoying.
Levin had more than once already tried a way he knew for stifling hisanger, and turning all that seemed dark right again, and he tried thatway now. He watched how Mishka strode along, swinging the huge clods ofearth that clung to each foot; and getting off his horse, he took thesieve from Vassily and started sowing himself.
"Where did you stop?"
Vassily pointed to the mark with his foot, and Levin went forward asbest he could, scattering the seed on the land. Walking was as difficultas on a bog, and by the time Levin had ended the row he was in a greatheat, and he stopped and gave up the sieve to Vassily.
"Well, master, when summer’s here, mind you don’t scold me for theserows," said Vassily.
"Eh?" said Levin cheerily, already feeling the effect of his method.
"Why, you’ll see in the summer time. It’ll look different. Look youwhere I sowed last spring. How I did work at it! I do my best,Konstantin Dmitrievitch, d’ye see, as I would for my own father. I don’tlike bad work myself, nor would I let another man do it. What’s good forthe master’s good for us too. To look out yonder now," said Vassily,pointing, "it does one’s heart good."
"It’s a lovely spring, Vassily."
"Why, it’s a spring such as the old men don’t remember the like of. Iwas up home; an old man up there has sown wheat too, about an acre ofit. He was saying you wouldn’t know it from rye."
"Have you been sowing wheat long?"
"Why, sir, it was you taught us the year before last. You gave me twomeasures. We sold about eight bushels and sowed a rood."
"Well, mind you crumble up the clods," said Levin, going towards hishorse, "and keep an eye on Mishka. And if there’s a good crop you shallhave half a rouble for every acre."
"Humbly thankful. We are very well content, sir, as it is."
Levin got on his horse and rode towards the field where was last year’sclover, and the one which was ploughed ready for the spring corn.
The crop of clover coming up in the stubble was magnificent. It hadsurvived everything, and stood up vividly green through the brokenstalks of last year’s wheat. The horse sank in up to the pasterns, andhe drew each hoof with a sucking sound out of the half-thawed ground.Over the ploughland riding was utterly impossible; the horse could onlykeep a foothold where there was ice, and in the thawing furrows he sankdeep in at each step. The ploughland was in splendid condition; in acouple of days it would be fit for harrowing and sowing. Everything wascapital, everything was cheering. Levin rode back across the streams,hoping the water would have gone down. And he did in fact get across,and startled two ducks. "There must be snipe too," he thought, and justas he reached the turning homewards he met the forest keeper, whoconfirmed his theory about the snipe.
Levin went home at a trot, so as to have time to eat his dinner and gethis gun ready for the evening.


Chapter 14

As he rode up to the house in the happiest frame of mind, Levin heardthe bell ring at the side of the principal entrance of the house.
"Yes, that’s someone from the railway station," he thought, "just thetime to be here from the Moscow train ... Who could it be? What if it’sbrother Nikolay? He did say: ‘Maybe I’ll go to the waters, or maybe I’llcome down to you.’" He felt dismayed and vexed for the first minute,that his brother Nikolay’s presence should come to disturb his happymood of spring. But he felt ashamed of the feeling, and at once heopened, as it were, the arms of his soul, and with a softened feeling ofjoy and expectation, now he hoped with all his heart that it was hisbrother. He pricked up his horse, and riding out from behind the acaciashe saw a hired three-horse sledge from the railway station, and agentleman in a fur coat. It was not his brother. "Oh, if it were onlysome nice person one could talk to a little!" he thought.
"Ah," cried Levin joyfully, flinging up both his hands. "Here’s adelightful visitor! Ah, how glad I am to see you!" he shouted,recognizing Stepan Arkadyevitch.
"I shall find out for certain whether she’s married, or when she’s goingto be married," he thought. And on that delicious spring day he feltthat the thought of her did not hurt him at all.
"Well, you didn’t expect me, eh?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, getting outof the sledge, splashed with mud on the bridge of his nose, on hischeek, and on his eyebrows, but radiant with health and good spirits."I’ve come to see you in the first place," he said, embracing andkissing him, "to have some stand-shooting second, and to sell the forestat Ergushovo third."
"Delightful! What a spring we’re having! How ever did you get along in asledge?"
"In a cart it would have been worse still, Konstantin Dmitrievitch,"answered the driver, who knew him.
"Well, I’m very, very glad to see you," said Levin, with a genuine smileof childlike delight.
Levin led his friend to the room set apart for visitors, where StepanArkadyevitch’s things were carried also—a bag, a gun in a case, asatchel for cigars. Leaving him there to wash and change his clothes,Levin went off to the counting house to speak about the ploughing andclover. Agafea Mihalovna, always very anxious for the credit of thehouse, met him in the hall with inquiries about dinner.
"Do just as you like, only let it be as soon as possible," he said, andwent to the bailiff.
When he came back, Stepan Arkadyevitch, washed and combed, came out ofhis room with a beaming smile, and they went upstairs together.
"Well, I am glad I managed to get away to you! Now I shall understandwhat the mysterious business is that you are always absorbed in here.No, really, I envy you. What a house, how nice it all is! So bright, socheerful!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, forgetting that it was not alwaysspring and fine weather like that day. "And your nurse is simplycharming! A pretty maid in an apron might be even more agreeable,perhaps; but for your severe monastic style it does very well."
Stepan Arkadyevitch told him many interesting pieces of news; especiallyinteresting to Levin was the news that his brother, Sergey Ivanovitch,was intending to pay him a visit in the summer.
Not one word did Stepan Arkadyevitch say in reference to Kitty and theShtcherbatskys; he merely gave him greetings from his wife. Levin wasgrateful to him for his delicacy and was very glad of his visitor. Asalways happened with him during his solitude, a mass of ideas andfeelings had been accumulating within him, which he could notcommunicate to those about him. And now he poured out upon StepanArkadyevitch his poetic joy in the spring, and his failures and plansfor the land, and his thoughts and criticisms on the books he had beenreading, and the idea of his own book, the basis of which really was,though he was unaware of it himself, a criticism of all the old books onagriculture. Stepan Arkadyevitch, always charming, understandingeverything at the slightest reference, was particularly charming on thisvisit, and Levin noticed in him a special tenderness, as it were, and anew tone of respect that flattered him.
The efforts of Agafea Mihalovna and the cook, that the dinner should beparticularly good, only ended in the two famished friends attacking thepreliminary course, eating a great deal of bread and butter, salt gooseand salted mushrooms, and in Levin’s finally ordering the soup to beserved without the accompaniment of little pies, with which the cook hadparticularly meant to impress their visitor. But though StepanArkadyevitch was accustomed to very different dinners, he thoughteverything excellent: the herb brandy, and the bread, and the butter,and above all the salt goose and the mushrooms, and the nettle soup, andthe chicken in white sauce, and the white Crimean wine—everything wassuperb and delicious.
"Splendid, splendid!" he said, lighting a fat cigar after the roast. "Ifeel as if, coming to you, I had landed on a peaceful shore after thenoise and jolting of a steamer. And so you maintain that the laborerhimself is an element to be studied and to regulate the choice ofmethods in agriculture. Of course, I’m an ignorant outsider; but Ishould fancy theory and its application will have its influence on thelaborer too."
"Yes, but wait a bit. I’m not talking of political economy, I’m talkingof the science of agriculture. It ought to be like the natural sciences,and to observe given phenomena and the laborer in his economic,ethnographical..."
At that instant Agafea Mihalovna came in with jam.
"Oh, Agafea Mihalovna," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, kissing the tips ofhis plump fingers, "what salt goose, what herb brandy!... What do youthink, isn’t it time to start, Kostya?" he added.
Levin looked out of the window at the sun sinking behind the baretree-tops of the forest.
"Yes, it’s time," he said. "Kouzma, get ready the trap," and he randownstairs.
Stepan Arkadyevitch, going down, carefully took the canvas cover off hisvarnished gun case with his own hands, and opening it, began to getready his expensive new-fashioned gun. Kouzma, who already scented a bigtip, never left Stepan Arkadyevitch’s side, and put on him both hisstockings and boots, a task which Stepan Arkadyevitch readily left him.
"Kostya, give orders that if the merchant Ryabinin comes ... I told himto come today, he’s to be brought in and to wait for me..."
"Why, do you mean to say you’re selling the forest to Ryabinin?"
"Yes. Do you know him?"
"To be sure I do. I have had to do business with him, ‘positively andconclusively.’"
Stepan Arkadyevitch laughed. "Positively and conclusively" were themerchant’s favorite words.
"Yes, it’s wonderfully funny the way he talks. She knows where hermaster’s going!" he added, patting Laska, who hung about Levin, whiningand licking his hands, his boots, and his gun.
The trap was already at the steps when they went out.
"I told them to bring the trap round; or would you rather walk?"
"No, we’d better drive," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, getting into thetrap. He sat down, tucked the tiger-skin rug round him, and lighted acigar. "How is it you don’t smoke? A cigar is a sort of thing, notexactly a pleasure, but the crown and outward sign of pleasure. Come,this is life! How splendid it is! This is how I should like to live!"
"Why, who prevents you?" said Levin, smiling.
"No, you’re a lucky man! You’ve got everything you like. You likehorses—and you have them; dogs—you have them; shooting—you have it;farming—you have it."
"Perhaps because I rejoice in what I have, and don’t fret for what Ihaven’t," said Levin, thinking of Kitty.
Stepan Arkadyevitch comprehended, looked at him, but said nothing.
Levin was grateful to Oblonsky for noticing, with his never-failingtact, that he dreaded conversation about the Shtcherbatskys, and sosaying nothing about them. But now Levin was longing to find out whatwas tormenting him so, yet he had not the courage to begin.
"Come, tell me how things are going with you," said Levin, bethinkinghimself that it was not nice of him to think only of himself.
Stepan Arkadyevitch’s eyes sparkled merrily.
"You don’t admit, I know, that one can be fond of new rolls when one hashad one’s rations of bread—to your mind it’s a crime; but I don’t countlife as life without love," he said, taking Levin’s question his ownway. "What am I to do? I’m made that way. And really, one does so littleharm to anyone, and gives oneself so much pleasure..."
"What! is there something new, then?" queried Levin.
"Yes, my boy, there is! There, do you see, you know the type of Ossian’swomen.... Women, such as one sees in dreams.... Well, these women aresometimes to be met in reality ... and these women are terrible. Woman,don’t you know, is such a subject that however much you study it, it’salways perfectly new."
"Well, then, it would be better not to study it."
"No. Some mathematician has said that enjoyment lies in the search fortruth, not in the finding it."
Levin listened in silence, and in spite of all the efforts he made, hecould not in the least enter into the feelings of his friend andunderstand his sentiments and the charm of studying such women.


Chapter 15

The place fixed on for the stand-shooting was not far above a stream ina little aspen copse. On reaching the copse, Levin got out of the trapand led Oblonsky to a corner of a mossy, swampy glade, already quitefree from snow. He went back himself to a double birch tree on the otherside, and leaning his gun on the fork of a dead lower branch, he tookoff his full overcoat, fastened his belt again, and worked his arms tosee if they were free.
Gray old Laska, who had followed them, sat down warily opposite him andpricked up her ears. The sun was setting behind a thick forest, and inthe glow of sunset the birch trees, dotted about in the aspen copse,stood out clearly with their hanging twigs, and their buds swollenalmost to bursting.
From the thickest parts of the copse, where the snow still remained,came the faint sound of narrow winding threads of water running away.Tiny birds twittered, and now and then fluttered from tree to tree.
In the pauses of complete stillness there came the rustle of last year’sleaves, stirred by the thawing of the earth and the growth of the grass.
"Imagine! One can hear and see the grass growing!" Levin said tohimself, noticing a wet, slate-colored aspen leaf moving beside a bladeof young grass. He stood, listened, and gazed sometimes down at the wetmossy ground, sometimes at Laska listening all alert, sometimes at thesea of bare tree tops that stretched on the slope below him, sometimesat the darkening sky, covered with white streaks of cloud.
A hawk flew high over a forest far away with slow sweep of its wings;another flew with exactly the same motion in the same direction andvanished. The birds twittered more and more loudly and busily in thethicket. An owl hooted not far off, and Laska, starting, steppedcautiously a few steps forward, and putting her head on one side, beganto listen intently. Beyond the stream was heard the cuckoo. Twice sheuttered her usual cuckoo call, and then gave a hoarse, hurried call andbroke down.
"Imagine! the cuckoo already!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, coming out frombehind a bush.
"Yes, I hear it," answered Levin, reluctantly breaking the stillnesswith his voice, which sounded disagreeable to himself. "Now it’scoming!"
Stepan Arkadyevitch’s figure again went behind the bush, and Levin sawnothing but the bright flash of a match, followed by the red glow andblue smoke of a cigarette.
"Tchk! tchk!" came the snapping sound of Stepan Arkadyevitch cocking hisgun.
"What’s that cry?" asked Oblonsky, drawing Levin’s attention to aprolonged cry, as though a colt were whinnying in a high voice, in play.
"Oh, don’t you know it? That’s the hare. But enough talking! Listen,it’s flying!" almost shrieked Levin, cocking his gun.
They heard a shrill whistle in the distance, and in the exact time, sowell known to the sportsman, two seconds later—another, a third, andafter the third whistle the hoarse, guttural cry could be heard.
Levin looked about him to right and to left, and there, just facing himagainst the dusky blue sky above the confused mass of tender shoots ofthe aspens, he saw the flying bird. It was flying straight towards him;the guttural cry, like the even tearing of some strong stuff, soundedclose to his ear; the long beak and neck of the bird could be seen, andat the very instant when Levin was taking aim, behind the bush whereOblonsky stood, there was a flash of red lightning: the bird droppedlike an arrow, and darted upwards again. Again came the red flash andthe sound of a blow, and fluttering its wings as though trying to keepup in the air, the bird halted, stopped still an instant, and fell witha heavy splash on the slushy ground.
"Can I have missed it?" shouted Stepan Arkadyevitch, who could not seefor the smoke.
"Here it is!" said Levin, pointing to Laska, who with one ear raised,wagging the end of her shaggy tail, came slowly back as though she wouldprolong the pleasure, and as it were smiling, brought the dead bird toher master. "Well, I’m glad you were successful," said Levin, who, atthe same time, had a sense of envy that he had not succeeded in shootingthe snipe.
"It was a bad shot from the right barrel," responded StepanArkadyevitch, loading his gun. "Sh... it’s flying!"
The shrill whistles rapidly following one another were heard again. Twosnipe, playing and chasing one another, and only whistling, not crying,flew straight at the very heads of the sportsmen. There was the reportof four shots, and like swallows the snipe turned swift somersaults inthe air and vanished from sight.
The stand-shooting was capital. Stepan Arkadyevitch shot two more birdsand Levin two, of which one was not found. It began to get dark. Venus,bright and silvery, shone with her soft light low down in the westbehind the birch trees, and high up in the east twinkled the red lightsof Arcturus. Over his head Levin made out the stars of the Great Bearand lost them again. The snipe had ceased flying; but Levin resolved tostay a little longer, till Venus, which he saw below a branch of birch,should be above it, and the stars of the Great Bear should be perfectlyplain. Venus had risen above the branch, and the ear of the Great Bearwith its shaft was now all plainly visible against the dark blue sky,yet still he waited.
"Isn’t it time to go home?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
It was quite still now in the copse, and not a bird was stirring.
"Let’s stay a little while," answered Levin.
"As you like."
They were standing now about fifteen paces from one another.
"Stiva!" said Levin unexpectedly; "how is it you don’t tell me whetheryour sister-in-law’s married yet, or when she’s going to be?"
Levin felt so resolute and serene that no answer, he fancied, couldaffect him. But he had never dreamed of what Stepan Arkadyevitchreplied.
"She’s never thought of being married, and isn’t thinking of it; butshe’s very ill, and the doctors have sent her abroad. They’re positivelyafraid she may not live."
"What!" cried Levin. "Very ill? What is wrong with her? How has she...?"
While they were saying this, Laska, with ears pricked up, was lookingupwards at the sky, and reproachfully at them.
"They have chosen a time to talk," she was thinking. "It’s on thewing.... Here it is, yes, it is. They’ll miss it," thought Laska.
But at that very instant both suddenly heard a shrill whistle which, asit were, smote on their ears, and both suddenly seized their guns andtwo flashes gleamed, and two bangs sounded at the very same instant. Thesnipe flying high above instantly folded its wings and fell into athicket, bending down the delicate shoots.
"Splendid! Together!" cried Levin, and he ran with Laska into thethicket to look for the snipe.
"Oh, yes, what was it that was unpleasant?" he wondered. "Yes, Kitty’sill.... Well, it can’t be helped; I’m very sorry," he thought.
"She’s found it! Isn’t she a clever thing?" he said, taking the warmbird from Laska’s mouth and packing it into the almost full game bag."I’ve got it, Stiva!" he shouted.


Chapter 16

On the way home Levin asked all details of Kitty’s illness and theShtcherbatskys’ plans, and though he would have been ashamed to admitit, he was pleased at what he heard. He was pleased that there was stillhope, and still more pleased that she should be suffering who had madehim suffer so much. But when Stepan Arkadyevitch began to speak of thecauses of Kitty’s illness, and mentioned Vronsky’s name, Levin cut himshort.
"I have no right whatever to know family matters, and, to tell thetruth, no interest in them either."
Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled hardly perceptibly, catching theinstantaneous change he knew so well in Levin’s face, which had becomeas gloomy as it had been bright a minute before.
"Have you quite settled about the forest with Ryabinin?" asked Levin.
"Yes, it’s settled. The price is magnificent; thirty-eight thousand.Eight straight away, and the rest in six years. I’ve been botheringabout it for ever so long. No one would give more."
"Then you’ve as good as given away your forest for nothing," said Levingloomily.
"How do you mean for nothing?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch with agood-humored smile, knowing that nothing would be right in Levin’s eyesnow.
"Because the forest is worth at least a hundred and fifty roubles theacre," answered Levin.
"Oh, these farmers!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch playfully. "Your tone ofcontempt for us poor townsfolk!... But when it comes to business, we doit better than anyone. I assure you I have reckoned it all out," hesaid, "and the forest is fetching a very good price—so much so that I’mafraid of this fellow’s crying off, in fact. You know it’s not‘timber,’" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, hoping by this distinction toconvince Levin completely of the unfairness of his doubts. "And it won’trun to more than twenty-five yards of fagots per acre, and he’s givingme at the rate of seventy roubles the acre."
Levin smiled contemptuously. "I know," he thought, "that fashion notonly in him, but in all city people, who, after being twice in ten yearsin the country, pick up two or three phrases and use them in season andout of season, firmly persuaded that they know all about it. ‘_Timber,run to so many yards the acre._’ He says those words withoutunderstanding them himself."
"I wouldn’t attempt to teach you what you write about in your office,"said he, "and if need arose, I should come to you to ask about it. Butyou’re so positive you know all the lore of the forest. It’s difficult.Have you counted the trees?"
"How count the trees?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, laughing, still tryingto draw his friend out of his ill-temper. "Count the sands of the sea,number the stars. Some higher power might do it."
"Oh, well, the higher power of Ryabinin can. Not a single merchant everbuys a forest without counting the trees, unless they get it given themfor nothing, as you’re doing now. I know your forest. I go there everyyear shooting, and your forest’s worth a hundred and fifty roubles anacre paid down, while he’s giving you sixty by installments. So that infact you’re making him a present of thirty thousand."
"Come, don’t let your imagination run away with you," said StepanArkadyevitch piteously. "Why was it none would give it, then?"
"Why, because he has an understanding with the merchants; he’s boughtthem off. I’ve had to do with all of them; I know them. They’re notmerchants, you know: they’re speculators. He wouldn’t look at a bargainthat gave him ten, fifteen per cent profit, but holds back to buy arouble’s worth for twenty kopecks."
"Well, enough of it! You’re out of temper."
"Not the least," said Levin gloomily, as they drove up to the house.
At the steps there stood a trap tightly covered with iron and leather,with a sleek horse tightly harnessed with broad collar-straps. In thetrap sat the chubby, tightly belted clerk who served Ryabinin ascoachman. Ryabinin himself was already in the house, and met the friendsin the hall. Ryabinin was a tall, thinnish, middle-aged man, withmustache and a projecting clean-shaven chin, and prominent muddy-lookingeyes. He was dressed in a long-skirted blue coat, with buttons below thewaist at the back, and wore high boots wrinkled over the ankles andstraight over the calf, with big galoshes drawn over them. He rubbed hisface with his handkerchief, and wrapping round him his coat, which satextremely well as it was, he greeted them with a smile, holding out hishand to Stepan Arkadyevitch, as though he wanted to catch something.
"So here you are," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, giving him his hand."That’s capital."
"I did not venture to disregard your excellency’s commands, though theroad was extremely bad. I positively walked the whole way, but I am hereat my time. Konstantin Dmitrievitch, my respects"; he turned to Levin,trying to seize his hand too. But Levin, scowling, made as though he didnot notice his hand, and took out the snipe. "Your honors have beendiverting yourselves with the chase? What kind of bird may it be, pray?"added Ryabinin, looking contemptuously at the snipe: "a great delicacy,I suppose." And he shook his head disapprovingly, as though he had gravedoubts whether this game were worth the candle.
"Would you like to go into my study?" Levin said in French to StepanArkadyevitch, scowling morosely. "Go into my study; you can talk there."
"Quite so, where you please," said Ryabinin with contemptuous dignity,as though wishing to make it felt that others might be in difficultiesas to how to behave, but that he could never be in any difficulty aboutanything.
On entering the study Ryabinin looked about, as his habit was, as thoughseeking the holy picture, but when he had found it, he did not crosshimself. He scanned the bookcases and bookshelves, and with the samedubious air with which he had regarded the snipe, he smiledcontemptuously and shook his head disapprovingly, as though by no meanswilling to allow that this game were worth the candle.
"Well, have you brought the money?" asked Oblonsky. "Sit down."
"Oh, don’t trouble about the money. I’ve come to see you to talk itover."
"What is there to talk over? But do sit down."
"I don’t mind if I do," said Ryabinin, sitting down and leaning hiselbows on the back of his chair in a position of the intensestdiscomfort to himself. "You must knock it down a bit, prince. It wouldbe too bad. The money is ready conclusively to the last farthing. As topaying the money down, there’ll be no hitch there."
Levin, who had meanwhile been putting his gun away in the cupboard, wasjust going out of the door, but catching the merchant’s words, hestopped.
"Why, you’ve got the forest for nothing as it is," he said. "He came tome too late, or I’d have fixed the price for him."
Ryabinin got up, and in silence, with a smile, he looked Levin down andup.
"Very close about money is Konstantin Dmitrievitch," he said with asmile, turning to Stepan Arkadyevitch; "there’s positively no dealingwith him. I was bargaining for some wheat of him, and a pretty price Ioffered too."
"Why should I give you my goods for nothing? I didn’t pick it up on theground, nor steal it either."
"Mercy on us! nowadays there’s no chance at all of stealing. With theopen courts and everything done in style, nowadays there’s no questionof stealing. We are just talking things over like gentlemen. Hisexcellency’s asking too much for the forest. I can’t make both ends meetover it. I must ask for a little concession."
"But is the thing settled between you or not? If it’s settled, it’suseless haggling; but if it’s not," said Levin, "I’ll buy the forest."
The smile vanished at once from Ryabinin’s face. A hawklike, greedy,cruel expression was left upon it. With rapid, bony fingers heunbuttoned his coat, revealing a shirt, bronze waistcoat buttons, and awatch chain, and quickly pulled out a fat old pocketbook.
"Here you are, the forest is mine," he said, crossing himself quickly,and holding out his hand. "Take the money; it’s my forest. That’sRyabinin’s way of doing business; he doesn’t haggle over everyhalf-penny," he added, scowling and waving the pocketbook.
"I wouldn’t be in a hurry if I were you," said Levin.
"Come, really," said Oblonsky in surprise. "I’ve given my word, youknow."
Levin went out of the room, slamming the door. Ryabinin looked towardsthe door and shook his head with a smile.
"It’s all youthfulness—positively nothing but boyishness. Why, I’mbuying it, upon my honor, simply, believe me, for the glory of it, thatRyabinin, and no one else, should have bought the copse of Oblonsky. Andas to the profits, why, I must make what God gives. In God’s name. Ifyou would kindly sign the title-deed..."
Within an hour the merchant, stroking his big overcoat neatly down, andhooking up his jacket, with the agreement in his pocket, seated himselfin his tightly covered trap, and drove homewards.
"Ugh, these gentlefolks!" he said to the clerk. "They—they’re a nicelot!"
"That’s so," responded the clerk, handing him the reins and buttoningthe leather apron. "But I can congratulate you on the purchase, MihailIgnatitch?"
"Well, well..."


Chapter 17

Stepan Arkadyevitch went upstairs with his pocket bulging with notes,which the merchant had paid him for three months in advance. Thebusiness of the forest was over, the money in his pocket; their shootinghad been excellent, and Stepan Arkadyevitch was in the happiest frame ofmind, and so he felt specially anxious to dissipate the ill-humor thathad come upon Levin. He wanted to finish the day at supper as pleasantlyas it had been begun.
Levin certainly was out of humor, and in spite of all his desire to beaffectionate and cordial to his charming visitor, he could not controlhis mood. The intoxication of the news that Kitty was not married hadgradually begun to work upon him.
Kitty was not married, but ill, and ill from love for a man who hadslighted her. This slight, as it were, rebounded upon him. Vronsky hadslighted her, and she had slighted him, Levin. Consequently Vronsky hadthe right to despise Levin, and therefore he was his enemy. But all thisLevin did not think out. He vaguely felt that there was something in itinsulting to him, and he was not angry now at what had disturbed him,but he fell foul of everything that presented itself. The stupid sale ofthe forest, the fraud practiced upon Oblonsky and concluded in hishouse, exasperated him.
"Well, finished?" he said, meeting Stepan Arkadyevitch upstairs. "Wouldyou like supper?"
"Well, I wouldn’t say no to it. What an appetite I get in the country!Wonderful! Why didn’t you offer Ryabinin something?"
"Oh, damn him!"
"Still, how you do treat him!" said Oblonsky. "You didn’t even shakehands with him. Why not shake hands with him?"
"Because I don’t shake hands with a waiter, and a waiter’s a hundredtimes better than he is."
"What a reactionist you are, really! What about the amalgamation ofclasses?" said Oblonsky.
"Anyone who likes amalgamating is welcome to it, but it sickens me."
"You’re a regular reactionist, I see."
"Really, I have never considered what I am. I am Konstantin Levin, andnothing else."
"And Konstantin Levin very much out of temper," said StepanArkadyevitch, smiling.
"Yes, I am out of temper, and do you know why? Because—excuse me—of yourstupid sale..."
Stepan Arkadyevitch frowned good-humoredly, like one who feels himselfteased and attacked for no fault of his own.
"Come, enough about it!" he said. "When did anybody ever sell anythingwithout being told immediately after the sale, ‘It was worth much more’?But when one wants to sell, no one will give anything.... No, I seeyou’ve a grudge against that unlucky Ryabinin."
"Maybe I have. And do you know why? You’ll say again that I’m areactionist, or some other terrible word; but all the same it does annoyand anger me to see on all sides the impoverishing of the nobility towhich I belong, and, in spite of the amalgamation of classes, I’m gladto belong. And their impoverishment is not due to extravagance—thatwould be nothing; living in good style—that’s the proper thing fornoblemen; it’s only the nobles who know how to do it. Now the peasantsabout us buy land, and I don’t mind that. The gentleman does nothing,while the peasant works and supplants the idle man. That’s as it oughtto be. And I’m very glad for the peasant. But I do mind seeing theprocess of impoverishment from a sort of—I don’t know what to callit—innocence. Here a Polish speculator bought for half its value amagnificent estate from a young lady who lives in Nice. And there amerchant will get three acres of land, worth ten roubles, as securityfor the loan of one rouble. Here, for no kind of reason, you’ve madethat rascal a present of thirty thousand roubles."
"Well, what should I have done? Counted every tree?"
"Of course, they must be counted. You didn’t count them, but Ryabinindid. Ryabinin’s children will have means of livelihood and education,while yours maybe will not!"
"Well, you must excuse me, but there’s something mean in this counting.We have our business and they have theirs, and they must make theirprofit. Anyway, the thing’s done, and there’s an end of it. And herecome some poached eggs, my favorite dish. And Agafea Mihalovna will giveus that marvelous herb-brandy..."
Stepan Arkadyevitch sat down at the table and began joking with AgafeaMihalovna, assuring her that it was long since he had tasted such adinner and such a supper.
"Well, you do praise it, anyway," said Agafea Mihalovna, "but KonstantinDmitrievitch, give him what you will—a crust of bread—he’ll eat it andwalk away."
Though Levin tried to control himself, he was gloomy and silent. Hewanted to put one question to Stepan Arkadyevitch, but he could notbring himself to the point, and could not find the words or the momentin which to put it. Stepan Arkadyevitch had gone down to his room,undressed, again washed, and attired in a nightshirt with gofferedfrills, he had got into bed, but Levin still lingered in his room,talking of various trifling matters, and not daring to ask what hewanted to know.
"How wonderfully they make this soap," he said gazing at a piece of soaphe was handling, which Agafea Mihalovna had put ready for the visitorbut Oblonsky had not used. "Only look; why, it’s a work of art."
"Yes, everything’s brought to such a pitch of perfection nowadays," saidStepan Arkadyevitch, with a moist and blissful yawn. "The theater, forinstance, and the entertainments ... a—a—a!" he yawned. "The electriclight everywhere ... a—a—a!"
"Yes, the electric light," said Levin. "Yes. Oh, and where’s Vronskynow?" he asked suddenly, laying down the soap.
"Vronsky?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, checking his yawn; "he’s inPetersburg. He left soon after you did, and he’s not once been in Moscowsince. And do you know, Kostya, I’ll tell you the truth," he went on,leaning his elbow on the table, and propping on his hand his handsomeruddy face, in which his moist, good-natured, sleepy eyes shone likestars. "It’s your own fault. You took fright at the sight of your rival.But, as I told you at the time, I couldn’t say which had the betterchance. Why didn’t you fight it out? I told you at the time that...." Heyawned inwardly, without opening his mouth.
"Does he know, or doesn’t he, that I did make an offer?" Levin wondered,gazing at him. "Yes, there’s something humbugging, diplomatic in hisface," and feeling he was blushing, he looked Stepan Arkadyevitchstraight in the face without speaking.
"If there was anything on her side at the time, it was nothing but asuperficial attraction," pursued Oblonsky. "His being such a perfectaristocrat, don’t you know, and his future position in society, had aninfluence not with her, but with her mother."
Levin scowled. The humiliation of his rejection stung him to the heart,as though it were a fresh wound he had only just received. But he was athome, and the walls of home are a support.
"Stay, stay," he began, interrupting Oblonsky. "You talk of his being anaristocrat. But allow me to ask what it consists in, that aristocracy ofVronsky or of anybody else, beside which I can be looked down upon? Youconsider Vronsky an aristocrat, but I don’t. A man whose father crawledup from nothing at all by intrigue, and whose mother—God knows whom shewasn’t mixed up with.... No, excuse me, but I consider myselfaristocratic, and people like me, who can point back in the past tothree or four honorable generations of their family, of the highestdegree of breeding (talent and intellect, of course that’s anothermatter), and have never curried favor with anyone, never depended onanyone for anything, like my father and my grandfather. And I know manysuch. You think it mean of me to count the trees in my forest, while youmake Ryabinin a present of thirty thousand; but you get rents from yourlands and I don’t know what, while I don’t and so I prize what’s come tome from my ancestors or been won by hard work.... We are aristocrats,and not those who can only exist by favor of the powerful of this world,and who can be bought for twopence halfpenny."
"Well, but whom are you attacking? I agree with you," said StepanArkadyevitch, sincerely and genially; though he was aware that in theclass of those who could be bought for twopence halfpenny Levin wasreckoning him too. Levin’s warmth gave him genuine pleasure. "Whom areyou attacking? Though a good deal is not true that you say aboutVronsky, but I won’t talk about that. I tell you straight out, if I wereyou, I should go back with me to Moscow, and..."
"No; I don’t know whether you know it or not, but I don’t care. And Itell you—I did make an offer and was rejected, and Katerina Alexandrovnais nothing now to me but a painful and humiliating reminiscence."
"What ever for? What nonsense!"
"But we won’t talk about it. Please forgive me, if I’ve been nasty,"said Levin. Now that he had opened his heart, he became as he had beenin the morning. "You’re not angry with me, Stiva? Please don’t beangry," he said, and smiling, he took his hand.
"Of course not; not a bit, and no reason to be. I’m glad we’ve spokenopenly. And do you know, stand-shooting in the morning is unusuallygood—why not go? I couldn’t sleep the night anyway, but I might gostraight from shooting to the station."
"Capital."


Chapter 18

Although all Vronsky’s inner life was absorbed in his passion, hisexternal life unalterably and inevitably followed along the oldaccustomed lines of his social and regimental ties and interests. Theinterests of his regiment took an important place in Vronsky’s life,both because he was fond of the regiment, and because the regiment wasfond of him. They were not only fond of Vronsky in his regiment, theyrespected him too, and were proud of him; proud that this man, with hisimmense wealth, his brilliant education and abilities, and the path openbefore him to every kind of success, distinction, and ambition, haddisregarded all that, and of all the interests of life had the interestsof his regiment and his comrades nearest to his heart. Vronsky was awareof his comrades’ view of him, and in addition to his liking for thelife, he felt bound to keep up that reputation.
It need not be said that he did not speak of his love to any of hiscomrades, nor did he betray his secret even in the wildest drinkingbouts (though indeed he was never so drunk as to lose all control ofhimself). And he shut up any of his thoughtless comrades who attemptedto allude to his connection. But in spite of that, his love was known toall the town; everyone guessed with more or less confidence at hisrelations with Madame Karenina. The majority of the younger men enviedhim for just what was the most irksome factor in his love—the exaltedposition of Karenin, and the consequent publicity of their connection insociety.
The greater number of the young women, who envied Anna and had long beenweary of hearing her called _virtuous_, rejoiced at the fulfillment oftheir predictions, and were only waiting for a decisive turn in publicopinion to fall upon her with all the weight of their scorn. They werealready making ready their handfuls of mud to fling at her when theright moment arrived. The greater number of the middle-aged people andcertain great personages were displeased at the prospect of theimpending scandal in society.
Vronsky’s mother, on hearing of his connection, was at first pleased atit, because nothing to her mind gave such a finishing touch to abrilliant young man as a _liaison_ in the highest society; she waspleased, too, that Madame Karenina, who had so taken her fancy, and hadtalked so much of her son, was, after all, just like all other prettyand well-bred women,—at least according to the Countess Vronskaya’sideas. But she had heard of late that her son had refused a positionoffered him of great importance to his career, simply in order to remainin the regiment, where he could be constantly seeing Madame Karenina.She learned that great personages were displeased with him on thisaccount, and she changed her opinion. She was vexed, too, that from allshe could learn of this connection it was not that brilliant, graceful,worldly _liaison_ which she would have welcomed, but a sort ofWertherish, desperate passion, so she was told, which might well leadhim into imprudence. She had not seen him since his abrupt departurefrom Moscow, and she sent her elder son to bid him come to see her.
This elder son, too, was displeased with his younger brother. He did notdistinguish what sort of love his might be, big or little, passionate orpassionless, lasting or passing (he kept a ballet girl himself, thoughhe was the father of a family, so he was lenient in these matters), buthe knew that this love affair was viewed with displeasure by those whomit was necessary to please, and therefore he did not approve of hisbrother’s conduct.
Besides the service and society, Vronsky had another greatinterest—horses; he was passionately fond of horses.
That year races and a steeplechase had been arranged for the officers.Vronsky had put his name down, bought a thoroughbred English mare, andin spite of his love affair, he was looking forward to the races withintense, though reserved, excitement...
These two passions did not interfere with one another. On the contrary,he needed occupation and distraction quite apart from his love, so as torecruit and rest himself from the violent emotions that agitated him.


Chapter 19

On the day of the races at Krasnoe Selo, Vronsky had come earlier thanusual to eat beefsteak in the common messroom of the regiment. He had noneed to be strict with himself, as he had very quickly been brought downto the required light weight; but still he had to avoid gaining flesh,and so he eschewed farinaceous and sweet dishes. He sat with his coatunbuttoned over a white waistcoat, resting both elbows on the table, andwhile waiting for the steak he had ordered he looked at a French novelthat lay open on his plate. He was only looking at the book to avoidconversation with the officers coming in and out; he was thinking.
He was thinking of Anna’s promise to see him that day after the races.But he had not seen her for three days, and as her husband had justreturned from abroad, he did not know whether she would be able to meethim today or not, and he did not know how to find out. He had had hislast interview with her at his cousin Betsy’s summer villa. He visitedthe Karenins’ summer villa as rarely as possible. Now he wanted to gothere, and he pondered the question how to do it.
"Of course I shall say Betsy has sent me to ask whether she’s coming tothe races. Of course, I’ll go," he decided, lifting his head from thebook. And as he vividly pictured the happiness of seeing her, his facelighted up.
"Send to my house, and tell them to have out the carriage and threehorses as quick as they can," he said to the servant, who handed him thesteak on a hot silver dish, and moving the dish up he began eating.
From the billiard room next door came the sound of balls knocking, oftalk and laughter. Two officers appeared at the entrance-door: one, ayoung fellow, with a feeble, delicate face, who had lately joined theregiment from the Corps of Pages; the other, a plump, elderly officer,with a bracelet on his wrist, and little eyes, lost in fat.
Vronsky glanced at them, frowned, and looking down at his book as thoughhe had not noticed them, he proceeded to eat and read at the same time.
"What? Fortifying yourself for your work?" said the plump officer,sitting down beside him.
"As you see," responded Vronsky, knitting his brows, wiping his mouth,and not looking at the officer.
"So you’re not afraid of getting fat?" said the latter, turning a chairround for the young officer.
"What?" said Vronsky angrily, making a wry face of disgust, and showinghis even teeth.
"You’re not afraid of getting fat?"
"Waiter, sherry!" said Vronsky, without replying, and moving the book tothe other side of him, he went on reading.
The plump officer took up the list of wines and turned to the youngofficer.
"You choose what we’re to drink," he said, handing him the card, andlooking at him.
"Rhine wine, please," said the young officer, stealing a timid glance atVronsky, and trying to pull his scarcely visible mustache. Seeing thatVronsky did not turn round, the young officer got up.
"Let’s go into the billiard room," he said.
The plump officer rose submissively, and they moved towards the door.
At that moment there walked into the room the tall and well-builtCaptain Yashvin. Nodding with an air of lofty contempt to the twoofficers, he went up to Vronsky.
"Ah! here he is!" he cried, bringing his big hand down heavily on hisepaulet. Vronsky looked round angrily, but his face lighted upimmediately with his characteristic expression of genial and manlyserenity.
"That’s it, Alexey," said the captain, in his loud baritone. "You mustjust eat a mouthful, now, and drink only one tiny glass."
"Oh, I’m not hungry."
"There go the inseparables," Yashvin dropped, glancing sarcastically atthe two officers who were at that instant leaving the room. And he benthis long legs, swathed in tight riding breeches, and sat down in thechair, too low for him, so that his knees were cramped up in a sharpangle.
"Why didn’t you turn up at the Red Theater yesterday? Numerova wasn’t atall bad. Where were you?"
"I was late at the Tverskoys’," said Vronsky.
"Ah!" responded Yashvin.
Yashvin, a gambler and a rake, a man not merely without moralprinciples, but of immoral principles, Yashvin was Vronsky’s greatestfriend in the regiment. Vronsky liked him both for his exceptionalphysical strength, which he showed for the most part by being able todrink like a fish, and do without sleep without being in the slightestdegree affected by it; and for his great strength of character, which heshowed in his relations with his comrades and superior officers,commanding both fear and respect, and also at cards, when he would playfor tens of thousands and however much he might have drunk, always withsuch skill and decision that he was reckoned the best player in theEnglish Club. Vronsky respected and liked Yashvin particularly becausehe felt Yashvin liked him, not for his name and his money, but forhimself. And of all men he was the only one with whom Vronsky would haveliked to speak of his love. He felt that Yashvin, in spite of hisapparent contempt for every sort of feeling, was the only man who could,so he fancied, comprehend the intense passion which now filled his wholelife. Moreover, he felt certain that Yashvin, as it was, took no delightin gossip and scandal, and interpreted his feeling rightly, that is tosay, knew and believed that this passion was not a jest, not a pastime,but something more serious and important.
Vronsky had never spoken to him of his passion, but he was aware that heknew all about it, and that he put the right interpretation on it, andhe was glad to see that in his eyes.
"Ah! yes," he said, to the announcement that Vronsky had been at theTverskoys’; and his black eyes shining, he plucked at his left mustache,and began twisting it into his mouth, a bad habit he had.
"Well, and what did you do yesterday? Win anything?" asked Vronsky.
"Eight thousand. But three don’t count; he won’t pay up."
"Oh, then you can afford to lose over me," said Vronsky, laughing.(Yashvin had bet heavily on Vronsky in the races.)
"No chance of my losing. Mahotin’s the only one that’s risky."
And the conversation passed to forecasts of the coming race, the onlything Vronsky could think of just now.
"Come along, I’ve finished," said Vronsky, and getting up he went to thedoor. Yashvin got up too, stretching his long legs and his long back.
"It’s too early for me to dine, but I must have a drink. I’ll come alongdirectly. Hi, wine!" he shouted, in his rich voice, that always rang outso loudly at drill, and set the windows shaking now.
"No, all right," he shouted again immediately after. "You’re going home,so I’ll go with you."
And he walked out with Vronsky.


Chapter 20

Vronsky was staying in a roomy, clean, Finnish hut, divided into two bya partition. Petritsky lived with him in camp too. Petritsky was asleepwhen Vronsky and Yashvin came into the hut.
"Get up, don’t go on sleeping," said Yashvin, going behind the partitionand giving Petritsky, who was lying with ruffled hair and with his nosein the pillow, a prod on the shoulder.
Petritsky jumped up suddenly onto his knees and looked round.
"Your brother’s been here," he said to Vronsky. "He waked me up, damnhim, and said he’d look in again." And pulling up the rug he flunghimself back on the pillow. "Oh, do shut up, Yashvin!" he said, gettingfurious with Yashvin, who was pulling the rug off him. "Shut up!" Heturned over and opened his eyes. "You’d better tell me what to drink;such a nasty taste in my mouth, that..."
"Brandy’s better than anything," boomed Yashvin. "Tereshtchenko! brandyfor your master and cucumbers," he shouted, obviously taking pleasure inthe sound of his own voice.
"Brandy, do you think? Eh?" queried Petritsky, blinking and rubbing hiseyes. "And you’ll drink something? All right then, we’ll have a drinktogether! Vronsky, have a drink?" said Petritsky, getting up andwrapping the tiger-skin rug round him. He went to the door of thepartition wall, raised his hands, and hummed in French, "There was aking in Thule." "Vronsky, will you have a drink?"
"Go along," said Vronsky, putting on the coat his valet handed to him.
"Where are you off to?" asked Yashvin. "Oh, here are your three horses,"he added, seeing the carriage drive up.
"To the stables, and I’ve got to see Bryansky, too, about the horses,"said Vronsky.
Vronsky had as a fact promised to call at Bryansky’s, some eight milesfrom Peterhof, and to bring him some money owing for some horses; and hehoped to have time to get that in too. But his comrades were at onceaware that he was not only going there.
Petritsky, still humming, winked and made a pout with his lips, asthough he would say: "Oh, yes, we know your Bryansky."
"Mind you’re not late!" was Yashvin’s only comment; and to change theconversation: "How’s my roan? is he doing all right?" he inquired,looking out of the window at the middle one of the three horses, whichhe had sold Vronsky.
"Stop!" cried Petritsky to Vronsky as he was just going out. "Yourbrother left a letter and a note for you. Wait a bit; where are they?"
Vronsky stopped.
"Well, where are they?"
"Where are they? That’s just the question!" said Petritsky solemnly,moving his forefinger upwards from his nose.
"Come, tell me; this is silly!" said Vronsky smiling.
"I have not lighted the fire. Here somewhere about."
"Come, enough fooling! Where is the letter?"
"No, I’ve forgotten really. Or was it a dream? Wait a bit, wait a bit!But what’s the use of getting in a rage. If you’d drunk four bottlesyesterday as I did you’d forget where you were lying. Wait a bit, I’llremember!"
Petritsky went behind the partition and lay down on his bed.
"Wait a bit! This was how I was lying, and this was how he was standing.Yes—yes—yes.... Here it is!"—and Petritsky pulled a letter out fromunder the mattress, where he had hidden it.
Vronsky took the letter and his brother’s note. It was the letter he wasexpecting—from his mother, reproaching him for not having been to seeher—and the note was from his brother to say that he must have a littletalk with him. Vronsky knew that it was all about the same thing. "Whatbusiness is it of theirs!" thought Vronsky, and crumpling up the lettershe thrust them between the buttons of his coat so as to read themcarefully on the road. In the porch of the hut he was met by twoofficers; one of his regiment and one of another.
Vronsky’s quarters were always a meeting place for all the officers.
"Where are you off to?"
"I must go to Peterhof."
"Has the mare come from Tsarskoe?"
"Yes, but I’ve not seen her yet."
"They say Mahotin’s Gladiator’s lame."
"Nonsense! But however are you going to race in this mud?" said theother.
"Here are my saviors!" cried Petritsky, seeing them come in. Before himstood the orderly with a tray of brandy and salted cucumbers. "Here’sYashvin ordering me to drink a pick-me-up."
"Well, you did give it to us yesterday," said one of those who had comein; "you didn’t let us get a wink of sleep all night."
"Oh, didn’t we make a pretty finish!" said Petritsky. "Volkov climbedonto the roof and began telling us how sad he was. I said: ‘Let’s havemusic, the funeral march!’ He fairly dropped asleep on the roof over thefuneral march."
"Drink it up; you positively must drink the brandy, and then seltzerwater and a lot of lemon," said Yashvin, standing over Petritsky like amother making a child take medicine, "and then a little champagne—just asmall bottle."
"Come, there’s some sense in that. Stop a bit, Vronsky. We’ll all have adrink."
"No; good-bye all of you. I’m not going to drink today."
"Why, are you gaining weight? All right, then we must have it alone.Give us the seltzer water and lemon."
"Vronsky!" shouted someone when he was already outside.
"Well?"
"You’d better get your hair cut, it’ll weigh you down, especially at thetop."
Vronsky was in fact beginning, prematurely, to get a little bald. Helaughed gaily, showing his even teeth, and pulling his cap over the thinplace, went out and got into his carriage.
"To the stables!" he said, and was just pulling out the letters to readthem through, but he thought better of it, and put off reading them soas not to distract his attention before looking at the mare. "Later!"


Chapter 21

The temporary stable, a wooden shed, had been put up close to the racecourse, and there his mare was to have been taken the previous day. Hehad not yet seen her there.
During the last few days he had not ridden her out for exercise himself,but had put her in the charge of the trainer, and so now he positivelydid not know in what condition his mare had arrived yesterday and wastoday. He had scarcely got out of his carriage when his groom, theso-called "stable boy," recognizing the carriage some way off, calledthe trainer. A dry-looking Englishman, in high boots and a short jacket,clean-shaven, except for a tuft below his chin, came to meet him,walking with the uncouth gait of jockey, turning his elbows out andswaying from side to side.
"Well, how’s Frou-Frou?" Vronsky asked in English.
"All right, sir," the Englishman’s voice responded somewhere in theinside of his throat. "Better not go in," he added, touching his hat."I’ve put a muzzle on her, and the mare’s fidgety. Better not go in,it’ll excite the mare."
"No, I’m going in. I want to look at her."
"Come along, then," said the Englishman, frowning, and speaking with hismouth shut, and, with swinging elbows, he went on in front with hisdisjointed gait.
They went into the little yard in front of the shed. A stable boy,spruce and smart in his holiday attire, met them with a broom in hishand, and followed them. In the shed there were five horses in theirseparate stalls, and Vronsky knew that his chief rival, Gladiator, avery tall chestnut horse, had been brought there, and must be standingamong them. Even more than his mare, Vronsky longed to see Gladiator,whom he had never seen. But he knew that by the etiquette of the racecourse it was not merely impossible for him to see the horse, butimproper even to ask questions about him. Just as he was passing alongthe passage, the boy opened the door into the second horse-box on theleft, and Vronsky caught a glimpse of a big chestnut horse with whitelegs. He knew that this was Gladiator, but, with the feeling of a manturning away from the sight of another man’s open letter, he turnedround and went into Frou-Frou’s stall.
"The horse is here belonging to Mak... Mak... I never can say the name,"said the Englishman, over his shoulder, pointing his big finger anddirty nail towards Gladiator’s stall.
"Mahotin? Yes, he’s my most serious rival," said Vronsky.
"If you were riding him," said the Englishman, "I’d bet on you."
"Frou-Frou’s more nervous; he’s stronger," said Vronsky, smiling at thecompliment to his riding.
"In a steeplechase it all depends on riding and on pluck," said theEnglishman.
Of pluck—that is, energy and courage—Vronsky did not merely feel that hehad enough; what was of far more importance, he was firmly convincedthat no one in the world could have more of this "pluck" than he had.
"Don’t you think I want more thinning down?"
"Oh, no," answered the Englishman. "Please, don’t speak loud. The mare’sfidgety," he added, nodding towards the horse-box, before which theywere standing, and from which came the sound of restless stamping in thestraw.
He opened the door, and Vronsky went into the horse-box, dimly lightedby one little window. In the horse-box stood a dark bay mare, with amuzzle on, picking at the fresh straw with her hoofs. Looking round himin the twilight of the horse-box, Vronsky unconsciously took in oncemore in a comprehensive glance all the points of his favorite mare.Frou-Frou was a beast of medium size, not altogether free from reproach,from a breeder’s point of view. She was small-boned all over; though herchest was extremely prominent in front, it was narrow. Her hind-quarterswere a little drooping, and in her fore-legs, and still more in herhind-legs, there was a noticeable curvature. The muscles of both hind-and fore-legs were not very thick; but across her shoulders the mare wasexceptionally broad, a peculiarity specially striking now that she waslean from training. The bones of her legs below the knees looked nothicker than a finger from in front, but were extraordinarily thick seenfrom the side. She looked altogether, except across the shoulders, as itwere, pinched in at the sides and pressed out in depth. But she had inthe highest degree the quality that makes all defects forgotten: thatquality was _blood_, the blood _that tells_, as the English expressionhas it. The muscles stood up sharply under the network of sinews,covered with the delicate, mobile skin, soft as satin, and they werehard as bone. Her clean-cut head, with prominent, bright, spirited eyes,broadened out at the open nostrils, that showed the red blood in thecartilage within. About all her figure, and especially her head, therewas a certain expression of energy, and, at the same time, of softness.She was one of those creatures which seem only not to speak because themechanism of their mouth does not allow them to.
To Vronsky, at any rate, it seemed that she understood all he felt atthat moment, looking at her.
Directly Vronsky went towards her, she drew in a deep breath, and,turning back her prominent eye till the white looked bloodshot, shestarted at the approaching figures from the opposite side, shaking hermuzzle, and shifting lightly from one leg to the other.
"There, you see how fidgety she is," said the Englishman.
"There, darling! There!" said Vronsky, going up to the mare and speakingsoothingly to her.
But the nearer he came, the more excited she grew. Only when he stood byher head, she was suddenly quieter, while the muscles quivered under hersoft, delicate coat. Vronsky patted her strong neck, straightened overher sharp withers a stray lock of her mane that had fallen on the otherside, and moved his face near her dilated nostrils, transparent as abat’s wing. She drew a loud breath and snorted out through her tensenostrils, started, pricked up her sharp ear, and put out her strong,black lip towards Vronsky, as though she would nip hold of his sleeve.But remembering the muzzle, she shook it and again began restlesslystamping one after the other her shapely legs.
"Quiet, darling, quiet!" he said, patting her again over herhind-quarters; and with a glad sense that his mare was in the bestpossible condition, he went out of the horse-box.
The mare’s excitement had infected Vronsky. He felt that his heart wasthrobbing, and that he, too, like the mare, longed to move, to bite; itwas both dreadful and delicious.
"Well, I rely on you, then," he said to the Englishman; "half-past sixon the ground."
"All right," said the Englishman. "Oh, where are you going, my lord?" heasked suddenly, using the title "my lord," which he had scarcely everused before.
Vronsky in amazement raised his head, and stared, as he knew how tostare, not into the Englishman’s eyes, but at his forehead, astounded atthe impertinence of his question. But realizing that in asking this theEnglishman had been looking at him not as an employer, but as a jockey,he answered:
"I’ve got to go to Bryansky’s; I shall be home within an hour."
"How often I’m asked that question today!" he said to himself, and heblushed, a thing which rarely happened to him. The Englishman lookedgravely at him; and, as though he, too, knew where Vronsky was going, headded:
"The great thing’s to keep quiet before a race," said he; "don’t get outof temper or upset about anything."
"All right," answered Vronsky, smiling; and jumping into his carriage,he told the man to drive to Peterhof.
Before he had driven many paces away, the dark clouds that had beenthreatening rain all day broke, and there was a heavy downpour of rain.
"What a pity!" thought Vronsky, putting up the roof of the carriage. "Itwas muddy before, now it will be a perfect swamp." As he sat in solitudein the closed carriage, he took out his mother’s letter and hisbrother’s note, and read them through.
Yes, it was the same thing over and over again. Everyone, his mother,his brother, everyone thought fit to interfere in the affairs of hisheart. This interference aroused in him a feeling of angry hatred—afeeling he had rarely known before. "What business is it of theirs? Whydoes everybody feel called upon to concern himself about me? And why dothey worry me so? Just because they see that this is something theycan’t understand. If it were a common, vulgar, worldly intrigue, theywould have left me alone. They feel that this is something different,that this is not a mere pastime, that this woman is dearer to me thanlife. And this is incomprehensible, and that’s why it annoys them.Whatever our destiny is or may be, we have made it ourselves, and we donot complain of it," he said, in the word _we_ linking himself withAnna. "No, they must needs teach us how to live. They haven’t an idea ofwhat happiness is; they don’t know that without our love, for us thereis neither happiness nor unhappiness—no life at all," he thought.
He was angry with all of them for their interference just because hefelt in his soul that they, all these people, were right. He felt thatthe love that bound him to Anna was not a momentary impulse, which wouldpass, as worldly intrigues do pass, leaving no other traces in the lifeof either but pleasant or unpleasant memories. He felt all the tortureof his own and her position, all the difficulty there was for them,conspicuous as they were in the eye of all the world, in concealingtheir love, in lying and deceiving; and in lying, deceiving, feigning,and continually thinking of others, when the passion that united themwas so intense that they were both oblivious of everything else buttheir love.
He vividly recalled all the constantly recurring instances of inevitablenecessity for lying and deceit, which were so against his natural bent.He recalled particularly vividly the shame he had more than oncedetected in her at this necessity for lying and deceit. And heexperienced the strange feeling that had sometimes come upon him sincehis secret love for Anna. This was a feeling of loathing forsomething—whether for Alexey Alexandrovitch, or for himself, or for thewhole world, he could not have said. But he always drove away thisstrange feeling. Now, too, he shook it off and continued the thread ofhis thoughts.
"Yes, she was unhappy before, but proud and at peace; and now she cannotbe at peace and feel secure in her dignity, though she does not show it.Yes, we must put an end to it," he decided.
And for the first time the idea clearly presented itself that it wasessential to put an end to this false position, and the sooner thebetter. "Throw up everything, she and I, and hide ourselves somewherealone with our love," he said to himself.


Chapter 22

The rain did not last long, and by the time Vronsky arrived, hisshaft-horse trotting at full speed and dragging the trace-horsesgalloping through the mud, with their reins hanging loose, the sun hadpeeped out again, the roofs of the summer villas and the old limetreesin the gardens on both sides of the principal streets sparkled with wetbrilliance, and from the twigs came a pleasant drip and from the roofsrushing streams of water. He thought no more of the shower spoiling therace course, but was rejoicing now that—thanks to the rain—he would besure to find her at home and alone, as he knew that AlexeyAlexandrovitch, who had lately returned from a foreign watering place,had not moved from Petersburg.
Hoping to find her alone, Vronsky alighted, as he always did, to avoidattracting attention, before crossing the bridge, and walked to thehouse. He did not go up the steps to the street door, but went into thecourt.
"Has your master come?" he asked a gardener.
"No, sir. The mistress is at home. But will you please go to the frontdoor; there are servants there," the gardener answered. "They’ll openthe door."
"No, I’ll go in from the garden."
And feeling satisfied that she was alone, and wanting to take her bysurprise, since he had not promised to be there today, and she wouldcertainly not expect him to come before the races, he walked, holdinghis sword and stepping cautiously over the sandy path, bordered withflowers, to the terrace that looked out upon the garden. Vronsky forgotnow all that he had thought on the way of the hardships and difficultiesof their position. He thought of nothing but that he would see herdirectly, not in imagination, but living, all of her, as she was inreality. He was just going in, stepping on his whole foot so as not tocreak, up the worn steps of the terrace, when he suddenly rememberedwhat he always forgot, and what caused the most torturing side of hisrelations with her, her son with his questioning—hostile, as hefancied—eyes.
This boy was more often than anyone else a check upon their freedom.When he was present, both Vronsky and Anna did not merely avoid speakingof anything that they could not have repeated before everyone; they didnot even allow themselves to refer by hints to anything the boy did notunderstand. They had made no agreement about this, it had settleditself. They would have felt it wounding themselves to deceive thechild. In his presence they talked like acquaintances. But in spite ofthis caution, Vronsky often saw the child’s intent, bewildered glancefixed upon him, and a strange shyness, uncertainty, at one timefriendliness, at another, coldness and reserve, in the boy’s manner tohim; as though the child felt that between this man and his mother thereexisted some important bond, the significance of which he could notunderstand.
As a fact, the boy did feel that he could not understand this relation,and he tried painfully, and was not able to make clear to himself whatfeeling he ought to have for this man. With a child’s keen instinct forevery manifestation of feeling, he saw distinctly that his father, hisgoverness, his nurse,—all did not merely dislike Vronsky, but looked onhim with horror and aversion, though they never said anything about him,while his mother looked on him as her greatest friend.
"What does it mean? Who is he? How ought I to love him? If I don’t know,it’s my fault; either I’m stupid or a naughty boy," thought the child.And this was what caused his dubious, inquiring, sometimes hostile,expression, and the shyness and uncertainty which Vronsky found soirksome. This child’s presence always and infallibly called up inVronsky that strange feeling of inexplicable loathing which he hadexperienced of late. This child’s presence called up both in Vronsky andin Anna a feeling akin to the feeling of a sailor who sees by thecompass that the direction in which he is swiftly moving is far from theright one, but that to arrest his motion is not in his power, that everyinstant is carrying him further and further away, and that to admit tohimself his deviation from the right direction is the same as admittinghis certain ruin.
This child, with his innocent outlook upon life, was the compass thatshowed them the point to which they had departed from what they knew,but did not want to know.
This time Seryozha was not at home, and she was completely alone. Shewas sitting on the terrace waiting for the return of her son, who hadgone out for his walk and been caught in the rain. She had sent amanservant and a maid out to look for him. Dressed in a white gown,deeply embroidered, she was sitting in a corner of the terrace behindsome flowers, and did not hear him. Bending her curly black head, shepressed her forehead against a cool watering pot that stood on theparapet, and both her lovely hands, with the rings he knew so well,clasped the pot. The beauty of her whole figure, her head, her neck, herhands, struck Vronsky every time as something new and unexpected. Hestood still, gazing at her in ecstasy. But, directly he would have madea step to come nearer to her, she was aware of his presence, pushed awaythe watering pot, and turned her flushed face towards him.
"What’s the matter? You are ill?" he said to her in French, going up toher. He would have run to her, but remembering that there might bespectators, he looked round towards the balcony door, and reddened alittle, as he always reddened, feeling that he had to be afraid and beon his guard.
"No, I’m quite well," she said, getting up and pressing his outstretchedhand tightly. "I did not expect ... thee."
"Mercy! what cold hands!" he said.
"You startled me," she said. "I’m alone, and expecting Seryozha; he’sout for a walk; they’ll come in from this side."
But, in spite of her efforts to be calm, her lips were quivering.
"Forgive me for coming, but I couldn’t pass the day without seeing you,"he went on, speaking French, as he always did to avoid using the stiffRussian plural form, so impossibly frigid between them, and thedangerously intimate singular.
"Forgive you? I’m so glad!"
"But you’re ill or worried," he went on, not letting go her hands andbending over her. "What were you thinking of?"
"Always the same thing," she said, with a smile.
She spoke the truth. If ever at any moment she had been asked what shewas thinking of, she could have answered truly: of the same thing, ofher happiness and her unhappiness. She was thinking, just when he cameupon her, of this: why was it, she wondered, that to others, to Betsy(she knew of her secret connection with Tushkevitch) it was all easy,while to her it was such torture? Today this thought gained specialpoignancy from certain other considerations. She asked him about theraces. He answered her questions, and, seeing that she was agitated,trying to calm her, he began telling her in the simplest tone thedetails of his preparations for the races.
"Tell him or not tell him?" she thought, looking into his quiet,affectionate eyes. "He is so happy, so absorbed in his races that hewon’t understand as he ought, he won’t understand all the gravity ofthis fact to us."
"But you haven’t told me what you were thinking of when I came in," hesaid, interrupting his narrative; "please tell me!"
She did not answer, and, bending her head a little, she lookedinquiringly at him from under her brows, her eyes shining under theirlong lashes. Her hand shook as it played with a leaf she had picked. Hesaw it, and his face expressed that utter subjection, that slavishdevotion, which had done so much to win her.
"I see something has happened. Do you suppose I can be at peace, knowingyou have a trouble I am not sharing? Tell me, for God’s sake," herepeated imploringly.
"Yes, I shan’t be able to forgive him if he does not realize all thegravity of it. Better not tell; why put him to the proof?" she thought,still staring at him in the same way, and feeling the hand that held theleaf was trembling more and more.
"For God’s sake!" he repeated, taking her hand.
"Shall I tell you?"
"Yes, yes, yes . . ."
"I’m with child," she said, softly and deliberately. The leaf in herhand shook more violently, but she did not take her eyes off him,watching how he would take it. He turned white, would have saidsomething, but stopped; he dropped her hand, and his head sank on hisbreast. "Yes, he realizes all the gravity of it," she thought, andgratefully she pressed his hand.
But she was mistaken in thinking he realized the gravity of the fact asshe, a woman, realized it. On hearing it, he felt come upon him withtenfold intensity that strange feeling of loathing of someone. But atthe same time, he felt that the turning-point he had been longing forhad come now; that it was impossible to go on concealing things from herhusband, and it was inevitable in one way or another that they shouldsoon put an end to their unnatural position. But, besides that, heremotion physically affected him in the same way. He looked at her with alook of submissive tenderness, kissed her hand, got up, and, in silence,paced up and down the terrace.
"Yes," he said, going up to her resolutely. "Neither you nor I havelooked on our relations as a passing amusement, and now our fate issealed. It is absolutely necessary to put an end"—he looked round as hespoke—"to the deception in which we are living."
"Put an end? How put an end, Alexey?" she said softly.
She was calmer now, and her face lighted up with a tender smile.
"Leave your husband and make our life one."
"It is one as it is," she answered, scarcely audibly.
"Yes, but altogether; altogether."
"But how, Alexey, tell me how?" she said in melancholy mockery at thehopelessness of her own position. "Is there any way out of such aposition? Am I not the wife of my husband?"
"There is a way out of every position. We must take our line," he said."Anything’s better than the position in which you’re living. Of course,I see how you torture yourself over everything—the world and your sonand your husband."
"Oh, not over my husband," she said, with a quiet smile. "I don’t knowhim, I don’t think of him. He doesn’t exist."
"You’re not speaking sincerely. I know you. You worry about him too."
"Oh, he doesn’t even know," she said, and suddenly a hot flush came overher face; her cheeks, her brow, her neck crimsoned, and tears of shamecame into her eyes. "But we won’t talk of him."


Chapter 23

Vronsky had several times already, though not so resolutely as now,tried to bring her to consider their position, and every time he hadbeen confronted by the same superficiality and triviality with which shemet his appeal now. It was as though there were something in this whichshe could not or would not face, as though directly she began to speakof this, she, the real Anna, retreated somehow into herself, and anotherstrange and unaccountable woman came out, whom he did not love, and whomhe feared, and who was in opposition to him. But today he was resolvedto have it out.
"Whether he knows or not," said Vronsky, in his usual quiet and resolutetone, "that’s nothing to do with us. We cannot ... you cannot stay likethis, especially now."
"What’s to be done, according to you?" she asked with the same frivolousirony. She who had so feared he would take her condition too lightly wasnow vexed with him for deducing from it the necessity of taking somestep.
"Tell him everything, and leave him."
"Very well, let us suppose I do that," she said. "Do you know what theresult of that would be? I can tell you it all beforehand," and a wickedlight gleamed in her eyes, that had been so soft a minute before. "‘Eh,you love another man, and have entered into criminal intrigues withhim?’" (Mimicking her husband, she threw an emphasis on the word"criminal," as Alexey Alexandrovitch did.) "‘I warned you of the resultsin the religious, the civil, and the domestic relation. You have notlistened to me. Now I cannot let you disgrace my name,—’" "and my son,"she had meant to say, but about her son she could not jest,—"‘disgracemy name, and’—and more in the same style," she added. "In general terms,he’ll say in his official manner, and with all distinctness andprecision, that he cannot let me go, but will take all measures in hispower to prevent scandal. And he will calmly and punctually act inaccordance with his words. That’s what will happen. He’s not a man, buta machine, and a spiteful machine when he’s angry," she added, recallingAlexey Alexandrovitch as she spoke, with all the peculiarities of hisfigure and manner of speaking, and reckoning against him every defectshe could find in him, softening nothing for the great wrong she herselfwas doing him.
"But, Anna," said Vronsky, in a soft and persuasive voice, trying tosoothe her, "we absolutely must, anyway, tell him, and then be guided bythe line he takes."
"What, run away?"
"And why not run away? I don’t see how we can keep on like this. And notfor my sake—I see that you suffer."
"Yes, run away, and become your mistress," she said angrily.
"Anna," he said, with reproachful tenderness.
"Yes," she went on, "become your mistress, and complete the ruin of..."
Again she would have said "my son," but she could not utter that word.
Vronsky could not understand how she, with her strong and truthfulnature, could endure this state of deceit, and not long to get out ofit. But he did not suspect that the chief cause of it was theword—_son_, which she could not bring herself to pronounce. When shethought of her son, and his future attitude to his mother, who hadabandoned his father, she felt such terror at what she had done, thatshe could not face it; but, like a woman, could only try to comfortherself with lying assurances that everything would remain as it alwayshad been, and that it was possible to forget the fearful question of howit would be with her son.
"I beg you, I entreat you," she said suddenly, taking his hand, andspeaking in quite a different tone, sincere and tender, "never speak tome of that!"
"But, Anna..."
"Never. Leave it to me. I know all the baseness, all the horror of myposition; but it’s not so easy to arrange as you think. And leave it tome, and do what I say. Never speak to me of it. Do you promise me?...No, no, promise!..."
"I promise everything, but I can’t be at peace, especially after whatyou have told me. I can’t be at peace, when you can’t be at peace...."
"I?" she repeated. "Yes, I am worried sometimes; but that will pass, ifyou will never talk about this. When you talk about it—it’s only then itworries me."
"I don’t understand," he said.
"I know," she interrupted him, "how hard it is for your truthful natureto lie, and I grieve for you. I often think that you have ruined yourwhole life for me."
"I was just thinking the very same thing," he said; "how could yousacrifice everything for my sake? I can’t forgive myself that you’reunhappy!"
"I unhappy?" she said, coming closer to him, and looking at him with anecstatic smile of love. "I am like a hungry man who has been given food.He may be cold, and dressed in rags, and ashamed, but he is not unhappy.I unhappy? No, this is my unhappiness...."
She could hear the sound of her son’s voice coming towards them, andglancing swiftly round the terrace, she got up impulsively. Her eyesglowed with the fire he knew so well; with a rapid movement she raisedher lovely hands, covered with rings, took his head, looked a long lookinto his face, and, putting up her face with smiling, parted lips,swiftly kissed his mouth and both eyes, and pushed him away. She wouldhave gone, but he held her back.
"When?" he murmured in a whisper, gazing in ecstasy at her.
"Tonight, at one o’clock," she whispered, and, with a heavy sigh, shewalked with her light, swift step to meet her son.
Seryozha had been caught by the rain in the big garden, and he and hisnurse had taken shelter in an arbor.
"Well, _au revoir_," she said to Vronsky. "I must soon be getting readyfor the races. Betsy promised to fetch me."
Vronsky, looking at his watch, went away hurriedly.


Chapter 24

When Vronsky looked at his watch on the Karenins’ balcony, he was sogreatly agitated and lost in his thoughts that he saw the figures on thewatch’s face, but could not take in what time it was. He came out on tothe high road and walked, picking his way carefully through the mud, tohis carriage. He was so completely absorbed in his feeling for Anna,that he did not even think what o’clock it was, and whether he had timeto go to Bryansky’s. He had left him, as often happens, only theexternal faculty of memory, that points out each step one has to take,one after the other. He went up to his coachman, who was dozing on thebox in the shadow, already lengthening, of a thick limetree; he admiredthe shifting clouds of midges circling over the hot horses, and, wakingthe coachman, he jumped into the carriage, and told him to drive toBryansky’s. It was only after driving nearly five miles that he hadsufficiently recovered himself to look at his watch, and realize that itwas half-past five, and he was late.
There were several races fixed for that day: the Mounted Guards’ race,then the officers’ mile-and-a-half race, then the three-mile race, andthen the race for which he was entered. He could still be in time forhis race, but if he went to Bryansky’s he could only just be in time,and he would arrive when the whole of the court would be in theirplaces. That would be a pity. But he had promised Bryansky to come, andso he decided to drive on, telling the coachman not to spare the horses.
He reached Bryansky’s, spent five minutes there, and galloped back. Thisrapid drive calmed him. All that was painful in his relations with Anna,all the feeling of indefiniteness left by their conversation, hadslipped out of his mind. He was thinking now with pleasure andexcitement of the race, of his being anyhow, in time, and now and thenthe thought of the blissful interview awaiting him that night flashedacross his imagination like a flaming light.
The excitement of the approaching race gained upon him as he drovefurther and further into the atmosphere of the races, overtakingcarriages driving up from the summer villas or out of Petersburg.
At his quarters no one was left at home; all were at the races, and hisvalet was looking out for him at the gate. While he was changing hisclothes, his valet told him that the second race had begun already, thata lot of gentlemen had been to ask for him, and a boy had twice run upfrom the stables. Dressing without hurry (he never hurried himself, andnever lost his self-possession), Vronsky drove to the sheds. From thesheds he could see a perfect sea of carriages, and people on foot,soldiers surrounding the race course, and pavilions swarming withpeople. The second race was apparently going on, for just as he wentinto the sheds he heard a bell ringing. Going towards the stable, he metthe white-legged chestnut, Mahotin’s Gladiator, being led to therace-course in a blue forage horsecloth, with what looked like huge earsedged with blue.
"Where’s Cord?" he asked the stable-boy.
"In the stable, putting on the saddle."
In the open horse-box stood Frou-Frou, saddled ready. They were justgoing to lead her out.
"I’m not too late?"
"All right! All right!" said the Englishman; "don’t upset yourself!"
Vronsky once more took in in one glance the exquisite lines of hisfavorite mare; who was quivering all over, and with an effort he torehimself from the sight of her, and went out of the stable. He wenttowards the pavilions at the most favorable moment for escapingattention. The mile-and-a-half race was just finishing, and all eyeswere fixed on the horse-guard in front and the light hussar behind,urging their horses on with a last effort close to the winning post.From the center and outside of the ring all were crowding to the winningpost, and a group of soldiers and officers of the horse-guards wereshouting loudly their delight at the expected triumph of their officerand comrade. Vronsky moved into the middle of the crowd unnoticed,almost at the very moment when the bell rang at the finish of the race,and the tall, mudspattered horse-guard who came in first, bending overthe saddle, let go the reins of his panting gray horse that looked darkwith sweat.
The horse, stiffening out its legs, with an effort stopped its rapidcourse, and the officer of the horse-guards looked round him like a manwaking up from a heavy sleep, and just managed to smile. A crowd offriends and outsiders pressed round him.
Vronsky intentionally avoided that select crowd of the upper world,which was moving and talking with discreet freedom before the pavilions.He knew that Madame Karenina was there, and Betsy, and his brother’swife, and he purposely did not go near them for fear of somethingdistracting his attention. But he was continually met and stopped byacquaintances, who told him about the previous races, and kept askinghim why he was so late.
At the time when the racers had to go to the pavilion to receive theprizes, and all attention was directed to that point, Vronsky’s elderbrother, Alexander, a colonel with heavy fringed epaulets, came up tohim. He was not tall, though as broadly built as Alexey, and handsomerand rosier than he; he had a red nose, and an open, drunken-lookingface.
"Did you get my note?" he said. "There’s never any finding you."
Alexander Vronsky, in spite of the dissolute life, and in especial thedrunken habits, for which he was notorious, was quite one of the courtcircle.
Now, as he talked to his brother of a matter bound to be exceedinglydisagreeable to him, knowing that the eyes of many people might be fixedupon him, he kept a smiling countenance, as though he were jesting withhis brother about something of little moment.
"I got it, and I really can’t make out what _you_ are worrying yourselfabout," said Alexey.
"I’m worrying myself because the remark has just been made to me thatyou weren’t here, and that you were seen in Peterhof on Monday."
"There are matters which only concern those directly interested in them,and the matter you are so worried about is..."
"Yes, but if so, you may as well cut the service...."
"I beg you not to meddle, and that’s all I have to say."
Alexey Vronsky’s frowning face turned white, and his prominent lower jawquivered, which happened rarely with him. Being a man of very warmheart, he was seldom angry; but when he was angry, and when his chinquivered, then, as Alexander Vronsky knew, he was dangerous. AlexanderVronsky smiled gaily.
"I only wanted to give you Mother’s letter. Answer it, and don’t worryabout anything just before the race. _Bonne chance,_" he added, smilingand he moved away from him. But after him another friendly greetingbrought Vronsky to a standstill.
"So you won’t recognize your friends! How are you, _mon cher?_" saidStepan Arkadyevitch, as conspicuously brilliant in the midst of all thePetersburg brilliance as he was in Moscow, his face rosy, and hiswhiskers sleek and glossy. "I came up yesterday, and I’m delighted thatI shall see your triumph. When shall we meet?"
"Come tomorrow to the messroom," said Vronsky, and squeezing him by thesleeve of his coat, with apologies, he moved away to the center of therace course, where the horses were being led for the great steeplechase.
The horses who had run in the last race were being led home, steamingand exhausted, by the stable-boys, and one after another the freshhorses for the coming race made their appearance, for the most partEnglish racers, wearing horsecloths, and looking with their drawn-upbellies like strange, huge birds. On the right was led in Frou-Frou,lean and beautiful, lifting up her elastic, rather long pasterns, asthough moved by springs. Not far from her they were taking the rug offthe lop-eared Gladiator. The strong, exquisite, perfectly correct linesof the stallion, with his superb hind-quarters and excessively shortpasterns almost over his hoofs, attracted Vronsky’s attention in spiteof himself. He would have gone up to his mare, but he was again detainedby an acquaintance.
"Oh, there’s Karenin!" said the acquaintance with whom he was chatting."He’s looking for his wife, and she’s in the middle of the pavilion.Didn’t you see her?"
"No," answered Vronsky, and without even glancing round towards thepavilion where his friend was pointing out Madame Karenina, he went upto his mare.
Vronsky had not had time to look at the saddle, about which he had togive some direction, when the competitors were summoned to the pavilionto receive their numbers and places in the row at starting. Seventeenofficers, looking serious and severe, many with pale faces, met togetherin the pavilion and drew the numbers. Vronsky drew the number seven. Thecry was heard: "Mount!"
Feeling that with the others riding in the race, he was the center uponwhich all eyes were fastened, Vronsky walked up to his mare in thatstate of nervous tension in which he usually became deliberate andcomposed in his movements. Cord, in honor of the races, had put on hisbest clothes, a black coat buttoned up, a stiffly starched collar, whichpropped up his cheeks, a round black hat, and top boots. He was calm anddignified as ever, and was with his own hands holding Frou-Frou by bothreins, standing straight in front of her. Frou-Frou was still tremblingas though in a fever. Her eye, full of fire, glanced sideways atVronsky. Vronsky slipped his finger under the saddle-girth. The mareglanced aslant at him, drew up her lip, and twitched her ear. TheEnglishman puckered up his lips, intending to indicate a smile thatanyone should verify his saddling.
"Get up; you won’t feel so excited."
Vronsky looked round for the last time at his rivals. He knew that hewould not see them during the race. Two were already riding forward tothe point from which they were to start. Galtsin, a friend of Vronsky’sand one of his more formidable rivals, was moving round a bay horse thatwould not let him mount. A little light hussar in tight riding breechesrode off at a gallop, crouched up like a cat on the saddle, in imitationof English jockeys. Prince Kuzovlev sat with a white face on histhoroughbred mare from the Grabovsky stud, while an English groom ledher by the bridle. Vronsky and all his comrades knew Kuzovlev and hispeculiarity of "weak nerves" and terrible vanity. They knew that he wasafraid of everything, afraid of riding a spirited horse. But now, justbecause it was terrible, because people broke their necks, and there wasa doctor standing at each obstacle, and an ambulance with a cross on it,and a sister of mercy, he had made up his mind to take part in the race.Their eyes met, and Vronsky gave him a friendly and encouraging nod.Only one he did not see, his chief rival, Mahotin on Gladiator.
"Don’t be in a hurry," said Cord to Vronsky, "and remember one thing:don’t hold her in at the fences, and don’t urge her on; let her go asshe likes."
"All right, all right," said Vronsky, taking the reins.
"If you can, lead the race; but don’t lose heart till the last minute,even if you’re behind."
Before the mare had time to move, Vronsky stepped with an agile,vigorous movement into the steel-toothed stirrup, and lightly and firmlyseated himself on the creaking leather of the saddle. Getting his rightfoot in the stirrup, he smoothed the double reins, as he always did,between his fingers, and Cord let go.
As though she did not know which foot to put first, Frou-Frou started,dragging at the reins with her long neck, and as though she were onsprings, shaking her rider from side to side. Cord quickened his step,following him. The excited mare, trying to shake off her rider first onone side and then the other, pulled at the reins, and Vronsky tried invain with voice and hand to soothe her.
They were just reaching the dammed-up stream on their way to thestarting point. Several of the riders were in front and several behind,when suddenly Vronsky heard the sound of a horse galloping in the mudbehind him, and he was overtaken by Mahotin on his white-legged,lop-eared Gladiator. Mahotin smiled, showing his long teeth, but Vronskylooked angrily at him. He did not like him, and regarded him now as hismost formidable rival. He was angry with him for galloping past andexciting his mare. Frou-Frou started into a gallop, her left footforward, made two bounds, and fretting at the tightened reins, passedinto a jolting trot, bumping her rider up and down. Cord, too, scowled,and followed Vronsky almost at a trot.


Chapter 25

There were seventeen officers in all riding in this race. The racecourse was a large three-mile ring of the form of an ellipse in front ofthe pavilion. On this course nine obstacles had been arranged: thestream, a big and solid barrier five feet high, just before thepavilion, a dry ditch, a ditch full of water, a precipitous slope, anIrish barricade (one of the most difficult obstacles, consisting of amound fenced with brushwood, beyond which was a ditch out of sight forthe horses, so that the horse had to clear both obstacles or might bekilled); then two more ditches filled with water, and one dry one; andthe end of the race was just facing the pavilion. But the race began notin the ring, but two hundred yards away from it, and in that part of thecourse was the first obstacle, a dammed-up stream, seven feet inbreadth, which the racers could leap or wade through as they preferred.
Three times they were ranged ready to start, but each time some horsethrust itself out of line, and they had to begin again. The umpire whowas starting them, Colonel Sestrin, was beginning to lose his temper,when at last for the fourth time he shouted "Away!" and the racersstarted.
Every eye, every opera glass, was turned on the brightly colored groupof riders at the moment they were in line to start.
"They’re off! They’re starting!" was heard on all sides after the hushof expectation.
And little groups and solitary figures among the public began runningfrom place to place to get a better view. In the very first minute theclose group of horsemen drew out, and it could be seen that they wereapproaching the stream in twos and threes and one behind another. To thespectators it seemed as though they had all started simultaneously, butto the racers there were seconds of difference that had great value tothem.
Frou-Frou, excited and over-nervous, had lost the first moment, andseveral horses had started before her, but before reaching the stream,Vronsky, who was holding in the mare with all his force as she tugged atthe bridle, easily overtook three, and there were left in front of himMahotin’s chestnut Gladiator, whose hind-quarters were moving lightlyand rhythmically up and down exactly in front of Vronsky, and in frontof all, the dainty mare Diana bearing Kuzovlev more dead than alive.
For the first instant Vronsky was not master either of himself or hismare. Up to the first obstacle, the stream, he could not guide themotions of his mare.
Gladiator and Diana came up to it together and almost at the sameinstant; simultaneously they rose above the stream and flew across tothe other side; Frou-Frou darted after them, as if flying; but at thevery moment when Vronsky felt himself in the air, he suddenly saw almostunder his mare’s hoofs Kuzovlev, who was floundering with Diana on thefurther side of the stream. (Kuzovlev had let go the reins as he tookthe leap, and the mare had sent him flying over her head.) Those detailsVronsky learned later; at the moment all he saw was that just under him,where Frou-Frou must alight, Diana’s legs or head might be in the way.But Frou-Frou drew up her legs and back in the very act of leaping, likea falling cat, and, clearing the other mare, alighted beyond her.
"O the darling!" thought Vronsky.
After crossing the stream Vronsky had complete control of his mare, andbegan holding her in, intending to cross the great barrier behindMahotin, and to try to overtake him in the clear ground of about fivehundred yards that followed it.
The great barrier stood just in front of the imperial pavilion. The Tsarand the whole court and crowds of people were all gazing at them—at him,and Mahotin a length ahead of him, as they drew near the "devil," as thesolid barrier was called. Vronsky was aware of those eyes fastened uponhim from all sides, but he saw nothing except the ears and neck of hisown mare, the ground racing to meet him, and the back and white legs ofGladiator beating time swiftly before him, and keeping always the samedistance ahead. Gladiator rose, with no sound of knocking againstanything. With a wave of his short tail he disappeared from Vronsky’ssight.
"Bravo!" cried a voice.
At the same instant, under Vronsky’s eyes, right before him flashed thepalings of the barrier. Without the slightest change in her action hismare flew over it; the palings vanished, and he heard only a crashbehind him. The mare, excited by Gladiator’s keeping ahead, had risentoo soon before the barrier, and grazed it with her hind hoofs. But herpace never changed, and Vronsky, feeling a spatter of mud in his face,realized that he was once more the same distance from Gladiator. Oncemore he perceived in front of him the same back and short tail, andagain the same swiftly moving white legs that got no further away.
At the very moment when Vronsky thought that now was the time toovertake Mahotin, Frou-Frou herself, understanding his thoughts, withoutany incitement on his part, gained ground considerably, and begangetting alongside of Mahotin on the most favorable side, close to theinner cord. Mahotin would not let her pass that side. Vronsky had hardlyformed the thought that he could perhaps pass on the outer side, whenFrou-Frou shifted her pace and began overtaking him on the other side.Frou-Frou’s shoulder, beginning by now to be dark with sweat, was evenwith Gladiator’s back. For a few lengths they moved evenly. But beforethe obstacle they were approaching, Vronsky began working at the reins,anxious to avoid having to take the outer circle, and swiftly passedMahotin just upon the declivity. He caught a glimpse of his mud-stainedface as he flashed by. He even fancied that he smiled. Vronsky passedMahotin, but he was immediately aware of him close upon him, and henever ceased hearing the even-thudding hoofs and the rapid and stillquite fresh breathing of Gladiator.
The next two obstacles, the water course and the barrier, were easilycrossed, but Vronsky began to hear the snorting and thud of Gladiatorcloser upon him. He urged on his mare, and to his delight felt that sheeasily quickened her pace, and the thud of Gladiator’s hoofs was againheard at the same distance away.
Vronsky was at the head of the race, just as he wanted to be and as Cordhad advised, and now he felt sure of being the winner. His excitement,his delight, and his tenderness for Frou-Frou grew keener and keener. Helonged to look round again, but he did not dare do this, and tried to becool and not to urge on his mare so to keep the same reserve of force inher as he felt that Gladiator still kept. There remained only oneobstacle, the most difficult; if he could cross it ahead of the othershe would come in first. He was flying towards the Irish barricade,Frou-Frou and he both together saw the barricade in the distance, andboth the man and the mare had a moment’s hesitation. He saw theuncertainty in the mare’s ears and lifted the whip, but at the same timefelt that his fears were groundless; the mare knew what was wanted. Shequickened her pace and rose smoothly, just as he had fancied she would,and as she left the ground gave herself up to the force of her rush,which carried her far beyond the ditch; and with the same rhythm,without effort, with the same leg forward, Frou-Frou fell back into herpace again.
"Bravo, Vronsky!" he heard shouts from a knot of men—he knew they werehis friends in the regiment—who were standing at the obstacle. He couldnot fail to recognize Yashvin’s voice though he did not see him.
"O my sweet!" he said inwardly to Frou-Frou, as he listened for what washappening behind. "He’s cleared it!" he thought, catching the thud ofGladiator’s hoofs behind him. There remained only the last ditch, filledwith water and five feet wide. Vronsky did not even look at it, butanxious to get in a long way first began sawing away at the reins,lifting the mare’s head and letting it go in time with her paces. Hefelt that the mare was at her very last reserve of strength; not herneck and shoulders merely were wet, but the sweat was standing in dropson her mane, her head, her sharp ears, and her breath came in short,sharp gasps. But he knew that she had strength left more than enough forthe remaining five hundred yards. It was only from feeling himselfnearer the ground and from the peculiar smoothness of his motion thatVronsky knew how greatly the mare had quickened her pace. She flew overthe ditch as though not noticing it. She flew over it like a bird; butat the same instant Vronsky, to his horror, felt that he had failed tokeep up with the mare’s pace, that he had, he did not know how, made afearful, unpardonable mistake, in recovering his seat in the saddle. Allat once his position had shifted and he knew that something awful hadhappened. He could not yet make out what had happened, when the whitelegs of a chestnut horse flashed by close to him, and Mahotin passed ata swift gallop. Vronsky was touching the ground with one foot, and hismare was sinking on that foot. He just had time to free his leg when shefell on one side, gasping painfully, and, making vain efforts to risewith her delicate, soaking neck, she fluttered on the ground at his feetlike a shot bird. The clumsy movement made by Vronsky had broken herback. But that he only knew much later. At that moment he knew only thatMahotin had flown swiftly by, while he stood staggering alone on themuddy, motionless ground, and Frou-Frou lay gasping before him, bendingher head back and gazing at him with her exquisite eyes. Still unable torealize what had happened, Vronsky tugged at his mare’s reins. Again shestruggled all over like a fish, and her shoulders setting the saddleheaving, she rose on her front legs but unable to lift her back, shequivered all over and again fell on her side. With a face hideous withpassion, his lower jaw trembling, and his cheeks white, Vronsky kickedher with his heel in the stomach and again fell to tugging at the rein.She did not stir, but thrusting her nose into the ground, she simplygazed at her master with her speaking eyes.
"A—a—a!" groaned Vronsky, clutching at his head. "Ah! what have I done!"he cried. "The race lost! And my fault! shameful, unpardonable! And thepoor darling, ruined mare! Ah! what have I done!"
A crowd of men, a doctor and his assistant, the officers of hisregiment, ran up to him. To his misery he felt that he was whole andunhurt. The mare had broken her back, and it was decided to shoot her.Vronsky could not answer questions, could not speak to anyone. Heturned, and without picking up his cap that had fallen off, walked awayfrom the race course, not knowing where he was going. He felt utterlywretched. For the first time in his life he knew the bitterest sort ofmisfortune, misfortune beyond remedy, and caused by his own fault.
Yashvin overtook him with his cap, and led him home, and half an hourlater Vronsky had regained his self-possession. But the memory of thatrace remained for long in his heart, the cruelest and bitterest memoryof his life.


Chapter 26

The external relations of Alexey Alexandrovitch and his wife hadremained unchanged. The sole difference lay in the fact that he was morebusily occupied than ever. As in former years, at the beginning of thespring he had gone to a foreign watering-place for the sake of hishealth, deranged by the winter’s work that every year grew heavier. Andjust as always he returned in July and at once fell to work as usualwith increased energy. As usual, too, his wife had moved for the summerto a villa out of town, while he remained in Petersburg. From the dateof their conversation after the party at Princess Tverskaya’s he hadnever spoken again to Anna of his suspicions and his jealousies, andthat habitual tone of his bantering mimicry was the most convenient tonepossible for his present attitude to his wife. He was a little colder tohis wife. He simply seemed to be slightly displeased with her for thatfirst midnight conversation, which she had repelled. In his attitude toher there was a shade of vexation, but nothing more. "You would not beopen with me," he seemed to say, mentally addressing her; "so much theworse for you. Now you may beg as you please, but I won’t be open withyou. So much the worse for you!" he said mentally, like a man who, aftervainly attempting to extinguish a fire, should fly in a rage with hisvain efforts and say, "Oh, very well then! you shall burn for this!"This man, so subtle and astute in official life, did not realize all thesenselessness of such an attitude to his wife. He did not realize it,because it was too terrible to him to realize his actual position, andhe shut down and locked and sealed up in his heart that secret placewhere lay hid his feelings towards his family, that is, his wife andson. He who had been such a careful father, had from the end of thatwinter become peculiarly frigid to his son, and adopted to him just thesame bantering tone he used with his wife. "Aha, young man!" was thegreeting with which he met him.
Alexey Alexandrovitch asserted and believed that he had never in anyprevious year had so much official business as that year. But he was notaware that he sought work for himself that year, that this was one ofthe means for keeping shut that secret place where lay hid his feelingstowards his wife and son and his thoughts about them, which became moreterrible the longer they lay there. If anyone had had the right to askAlexey Alexandrovitch what he thought of his wife’s behavior, the mildand peaceable Alexey Alexandrovitch would have made no answer, but hewould have been greatly angered with any man who should question him onthat subject. For this reason there positively came into AlexeyAlexandrovitch’s face a look of haughtiness and severity whenever anyoneinquired after his wife’s health. Alexey Alexandrovitch did not want tothink at all about his wife’s behavior, and he actually succeeded in notthinking about it at all.
Alexey Alexandrovitch’s permanent summer villa was in Peterhof, and theCountess Lidia Ivanovna used as a rule to spend the summer there, closeto Anna, and constantly seeing her. That year Countess Lidia Ivanovnadeclined to settle in Peterhof, was not once at Anna Arkadyevna’s, andin conversation with Alexey Alexandrovitch hinted at the unsuitabilityof Anna’s close intimacy with Betsy and Vronsky. Alexey Alexandrovitchsternly cut her short, roundly declaring his wife to be above suspicion,and from that time began to avoid Countess Lidia Ivanovna. He did notwant to see, and did not see, that many people in society cast dubiousglances on his wife; he did not want to understand, and did notunderstand, why his wife had so particularly insisted on staying atTsarskoe, where Betsy was staying, and not far from the camp ofVronsky’s regiment. He did not allow himself to think about it, and hedid not think about it; but all the same though he never admitted it tohimself, and had no proofs, not even suspicious evidence, in the bottomof his heart he knew beyond all doubt that he was a deceived husband,and he was profoundly miserable about it.
How often during those eight years of happy life with his wife AlexeyAlexandrovitch had looked at other men’s faithless wives and otherdeceived husbands and asked himself: "How can people descend to that?how is it they don’t put an end to such a hideous position?" But now,when the misfortune had come upon himself, he was so far from thinkingof putting an end to the position that he would not recognize it at all,would not recognize it just because it was too awful, too unnatural.
Since his return from abroad Alexey Alexandrovitch had twice been attheir country villa. Once he dined there, another time he spent theevening there with a party of friends, but he had not once stayed thenight there, as it had been his habit to do in previous years.
The day of the races had been a very busy day for Alexey Alexandrovitch;but when mentally sketching out the day in the morning, he made up hismind to go to their country house to see his wife immediately afterdinner, and from there to the races, which all the Court were towitness, and at which he was bound to be present. He was going to seehis wife, because he had determined to see her once a week to keep upappearances. And besides, on that day, as it was the fifteenth, he hadto give his wife some money for her expenses, according to their usualarrangement.
With his habitual control over his thoughts, though he thought all thisabout his wife, he did not let his thoughts stray further in regard toher.
That morning was a very full one for Alexey Alexandrovitch. The eveningbefore, Countess Lidia Ivanovna had sent him a pamphlet by a celebratedtraveler in China, who was staying in Petersburg, and with it sheenclosed a note begging him to see the traveler himself, as he was anextremely interesting person from various points of view, and likely tobe useful. Alexey Alexandrovitch had not had time to read the pamphletthrough in the evening, and finished it in the morning. Then peoplebegan arriving with petitions, and there came the reports, interviews,appointments, dismissals, apportionment of rewards, pensions, grants,notes, the workaday round, as Alexey Alexandrovitch called it, thatalways took up so much time. Then there was private business of his own,a visit from the doctor and the steward who managed his property. Thesteward did not take up much time. He simply gave Alexey Alexandrovitchthe money he needed together with a brief statement of the position ofhis affairs, which was not altogether satisfactory, as it had happenedthat during that year, owing to increased expenses, more had been paidout than usual, and there was a deficit. But the doctor, a celebratedPetersburg doctor, who was an intimate acquaintance of AlexeyAlexandrovitch, took up a great deal of time. Alexey Alexandrovitch hadnot expected him that day, and was surprised at his visit, and stillmore so when the doctor questioned him very carefully about his health,listened to his breathing, and tapped at his liver. AlexeyAlexandrovitch did not know that his friend Lidia Ivanovna, noticingthat he was not as well as usual that year, had begged the doctor to goand examine him. "Do this for my sake," the Countess Lidia Ivanovna hadsaid to him.
"I will do it for the sake of Russia, countess," replied the doctor.
"A priceless man!" said the Countess Lidia Ivanovna.
The doctor was extremely dissatisfied with Alexey Alexandrovitch. Hefound the liver considerably enlarged, and the digestive powersweakened, while the course of mineral waters had been quite withouteffect. He prescribed more physical exercise as far as possible, and asfar as possible less mental strain, and above all no worry—in otherwords, just what was as much out of Alexey Alexandrovitch’s power asabstaining from breathing. Then he withdrew, leaving in AlexeyAlexandrovitch an unpleasant sense that something was wrong with him,and that there was no chance of curing it.
As he was coming away, the doctor chanced to meet on the staircase anacquaintance of his, Sludin, who was secretary of AlexeyAlexandrovitch’s department. They had been comrades at the university,and though they rarely met, they thought highly of each other and wereexcellent friends, and so there was no one to whom the doctor would havegiven his opinion of a patient so freely as to Sludin.
"How glad I am you’ve been seeing him!" said Sludin. "He’s not well, andI fancy.... Well, what do you think of him?"
"I’ll tell you," said the doctor, beckoning over Sludin’s head to hiscoachman to bring the carriage round. "It’s just this," said the doctor,taking a finger of his kid glove in his white hands and pulling it, "ifyou don’t strain the strings, and then try to break them, you’ll find ita difficult job; but strain a string to its very utmost, and the mereweight of one finger on the strained string will snap it. And with hisclose assiduity, his conscientious devotion to his work, he’s strainedto the utmost; and there’s some outside burden weighing on him, and nota light one," concluded the doctor, raising his eyebrows significantly."Will you be at the races?" he added, as he sank into his seat in thecarriage.
"Yes, yes, to be sure; it does waste a lot of time," the doctorresponded vaguely to some reply of Sludin’s he had not caught.
Directly after the doctor, who had taken up so much time, came thecelebrated traveler, and Alexey Alexandrovitch, by means of the pamphlethe had only just finished reading and his previous acquaintance with thesubject, impressed the traveler by the depth of his knowledge of thesubject and the breadth and enlightenment of his view of it.
At the same time as the traveler there was announced a provincialmarshal of nobility on a visit to Petersburg, with whom AlexeyAlexandrovitch had to have some conversation. After his departure, hehad to finish the daily routine of business with his secretary, and thenhe still had to drive round to call on a certain great personage on amatter of grave and serious import. Alexey Alexandrovitch only justmanaged to be back by five o’clock, his dinner-hour, and after diningwith his secretary, he invited him to drive with him to his countryvilla and to the races.
Though he did not acknowledge it to himself, Alexey Alexandrovitchalways tried nowadays to secure the presence of a third person in hisinterviews with his wife.


Chapter 27

Anna was upstairs, standing before the looking glass, and, withAnnushka’s assistance, pinning the last ribbon on her gown when sheheard carriage wheels crunching the gravel at the entrance.
"It’s too early for Betsy," she thought, and glancing out of the windowshe caught sight of the carriage and the black hat of AlexeyAlexandrovitch, and the ears that she knew so well sticking up each sideof it. "How unlucky! Can he be going to stay the night?" she wondered,and the thought of all that might come of such a chance struck her as soawful and terrible that, without dwelling on it for a moment, she wentdown to meet him with a bright and radiant face; and conscious of thepresence of that spirit of falsehood and deceit in herself that she hadcome to know of late, she abandoned herself to that spirit and begantalking, hardly knowing what she was saying.
"Ah, how nice of you!" she said, giving her husband her hand, andgreeting Sludin, who was like one of the family, with a smile. "You’restaying the night, I hope?" was the first word the spirit of falsehoodprompted her to utter; "and now we’ll go together. Only it’s a pity I’vepromised Betsy. She’s coming for me."
Alexey Alexandrovitch knit his brows at Betsy’s name.
"Oh, I’m not going to separate the inseparables," he said in his usualbantering tone. "I’m going with Mihail Vassilievitch. I’m orderedexercise by the doctors too. I’ll walk, and fancy myself at the springsagain."
"There’s no hurry," said Anna. "Would you like tea?"
She rang.
"Bring in tea, and tell Seryozha that Alexey Alexandrovitch is here.Well, tell me, how have you been? Mihail Vassilievitch, you’ve not beento see me before. Look how lovely it is out on the terrace," she said,turning first to one and then to the other.
She spoke very simply and naturally, but too much and too fast. She wasthe more aware of this from noticing in the inquisitive look MihailVassilievitch turned on her that he was, as it were, keeping watch onher.
Mihail Vassilievitch promptly went out on the terrace.
She sat down beside her husband.
"You don’t look quite well," she said.
"Yes," he said; "the doctor’s been with me today and wasted an hour ofmy time. I feel that some one of our friends must have sent him: myhealth’s so precious, it seems."
"No; what did he say?"
She questioned him about his health and what he had been doing, andtried to persuade him to take a rest and come out to her.
All this she said brightly, rapidly, and with a peculiar brilliance inher eyes. But Alexey Alexandrovitch did not now attach any specialsignificance to this tone of hers. He heard only her words and gave themonly the direct sense they bore. And he answered simply, thoughjestingly. There was nothing remarkable in all this conversation, butnever after could Anna recall this brief scene without an agonizing pangof shame.
Seryozha came in preceded by his governess. If Alexey Alexandrovitch hadallowed himself to observe he would have noticed the timid andbewildered eyes with which Seryozha glanced first at his father and thenat his mother. But he would not see anything, and he did not see it.
"Ah, the young man! He’s grown. Really, he’s getting quite a man. Howare you, young man?"
And he gave his hand to the scared child. Seryozha had been shy of hisfather before, and now, ever since Alexey Alexandrovitch had taken tocalling him young man, and since that insoluble question had occurred tohim whether Vronsky were a friend or a foe, he avoided his father. Helooked round towards his mother as though seeking shelter. It was onlywith his mother that he was at ease. Meanwhile, Alexey Alexandrovitchwas holding his son by the shoulder while he was speaking to thegoverness, and Seryozha was so miserably uncomfortable that Anna saw hewas on the point of tears.
Anna, who had flushed a little the instant her son came in, noticingthat Seryozha was uncomfortable, got up hurriedly, took AlexeyAlexandrovitch’s hand from her son’s shoulder, and kissing the boy, ledhim out onto the terrace, and quickly came back.
"It’s time to start, though," said she, glancing at her watch. "How isit Betsy doesn’t come?..."
"Yes," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, and getting up, he folded his handsand cracked his fingers. "I’ve come to bring you some money, too, fornightingales, we know, can’t live on fairy tales," he said. "You wantit, I expect?"
"No, I don’t ... yes, I do," she said, not looking at him, andcrimsoning to the roots of her hair. "But you’ll come back here afterthe races, I suppose?"
"Oh, yes!" answered Alexey Alexandrovitch. "And here’s the glory ofPeterhof, Princess Tverskaya," he added, looking out of the window atthe elegant English carriage with the tiny seats placed extremely high."What elegance! Charming! Well, let us be starting too, then."
Princess Tverskaya did not get out of her carriage, but her groom, inhigh boots, a cape, and black hat, darted out at the entrance.
"I’m going; good-bye!" said Anna, and kissing her son, she went up toAlexey Alexandrovitch and held out her hand to him. "It was ever so niceof you to come."
Alexey Alexandrovitch kissed her hand.
"Well, _au revoir_, then! You’ll come back for some tea; that’sdelightful!" she said, and went out, gay and radiant. But as soon as sheno longer saw him, she was aware of the spot on her hand that his lipshad touched, and she shuddered with repulsion.


Chapter 28

When Alexey Alexandrovitch reached the race-course, Anna was alreadysitting in the pavilion beside Betsy, in that pavilion where all thehighest society had gathered. She caught sight of her husband in thedistance. Two men, her husband and her lover, were the two centers ofher existence, and unaided by her external senses she was aware of theirnearness. She was aware of her husband approaching a long way off, andshe could not help following him in the surging crowd in the midst ofwhich he was moving. She watched his progress towards the pavilion, sawhim now responding condescendingly to an ingratiating bow, nowexchanging friendly, nonchalant greetings with his equals, nowassiduously trying to catch the eye of some great one of this world, andtaking off his big round hat that squeezed the tips of his ears. Allthese ways of his she knew, and all were hateful to her. "Nothing butambition, nothing but the desire to get on, that’s all there is in hissoul," she thought; "as for these lofty ideals, love of culture,religion, they are only so many tools for getting on."
From his glances towards the ladies’ pavilion (he was staring straightat her, but did not distinguish his wife in the sea of muslin, ribbons,feathers, parasols and flowers) she saw that he was looking for her, butshe purposely avoided noticing him.
"Alexey Alexandrovitch!" Princess Betsy called to him; "I’m sure youdon’t see your wife: here she is."
He smiled his chilly smile.
"There’s so much splendor here that one’s eyes are dazzled," he said,and he went into the pavilion. He smiled to his wife as a man shouldsmile on meeting his wife after only just parting from her, and greetedthe princess and other acquaintances, giving to each what was due—thatis to say, jesting with the ladies and dealing out friendly greetingsamong the men. Below, near the pavilion, was standing anadjutant-general of whom Alexey Alexandrovitch had a high opinion, notedfor his intelligence and culture. Alexey Alexandrovitch entered intoconversation with him.
There was an interval between the races, and so nothing hinderedconversation. The adjutant-general expressed his disapproval of races.Alexey Alexandrovitch replied defending them. Anna heard his high,measured tones, not losing one word, and every word struck her as false,and stabbed her ears with pain.
When the three-mile steeplechase was beginning, she bent forward andgazed with fixed eyes at Vronsky as he went up to his horse and mounted,and at the same time she heard that loathsome, never-ceasing voice ofher husband. She was in an agony of terror for Vronsky, but a stillgreater agony was the never-ceasing, as it seemed to her, stream of herhusband’s shrill voice with its familiar intonations.
"I’m a wicked woman, a lost woman," she thought; "but I don’t likelying, I can’t endure falsehood, while as for _him_ (her husband) it’sthe breath of his life—falsehood. He knows all about it, he sees it all;what does he care if he can talk so calmly? If he were to kill me, if hewere to kill Vronsky, I might respect him. No, all he wants is falsehoodand propriety," Anna said to herself, not considering exactly what itwas she wanted of her husband, and how she would have liked to see himbehave. She did not understand either that Alexey Alexandrovitch’speculiar loquacity that day, so exasperating to her, was merely theexpression of his inward distress and uneasiness. As a child that hasbeen hurt skips about, putting all his muscles into movement to drownthe pain, in the same way Alexey Alexandrovitch needed mental exerciseto drown the thoughts of his wife that in her presence and in Vronsky’s,and with the continual iteration of his name, would force themselves onhis attention. And it was as natural for him to talk well and cleverly,as it is natural for a child to skip about. He was saying:
"Danger in the races of officers, of cavalry men, is an essentialelement in the race. If England can point to the most brilliant feats ofcavalry in military history, it is simply owing to the fact that she hashistorically developed this force both in beasts and in men. Sport has,in my opinion, a great value, and as is always the case, we see nothingbut what is most superficial."
"It’s not superficial," said Princess Tverskaya. "One of the officers,they say, has broken two ribs."
Alexey Alexandrovitch smiled his smile, which uncovered his teeth, butrevealed nothing more.
"We’ll admit, princess, that that’s not superficial," he said, "butinternal. But that’s not the point," and he turned again to the generalwith whom he was talking seriously; "we mustn’t forget that those whoare taking part in the race are military men, who have chosen thatcareer, and one must allow that every calling has its disagreeable side.It forms an integral part of the duties of an officer. Low sports, suchas prize-fighting or Spanish bull-fights, are a sign of barbarity. Butspecialized trials of skill are a sign of development."
"No, I shan’t come another time; it’s too upsetting," said PrincessBetsy. "Isn’t it, Anna?"
"It is upsetting, but one can’t tear oneself away," said another lady."If I’d been a Roman woman I should never have missed a single circus."
Anna said nothing, and keeping her opera glass up, gazed always at thesame spot.
At that moment a tall general walked through the pavilion. Breaking offwhat he was saying, Alexey Alexandrovitch got up hurriedly, though withdignity, and bowed low to the general.
"You’re not racing?" the officer asked, chaffing him.
"My race is a harder one," Alexey Alexandrovitch respondeddeferentially.
And though the answer meant nothing, the general looked as though he hadheard a witty remark from a witty man, and fully relished _la pointe dela sauce_.
"There are two aspects," Alexey Alexandrovitch resumed: "those who takepart and those who look on; and love for such spectacles is anunmistakable proof of a low degree of development in the spectator, Iadmit, but..."
"Princess, bets!" sounded Stepan Arkadyevitch’s voice from below,addressing Betsy. "Who’s your favorite?"
"Anna and I are for Kuzovlev," replied Betsy.
"I’m for Vronsky. A pair of gloves?"
"Done!"
"But it is a pretty sight, isn’t it?"
Alexey Alexandrovitch paused while there was talking about him, but hebegan again directly.
"I admit that manly sports do not..." he was continuing.
But at that moment the racers started, and all conversation ceased.Alexey Alexandrovitch too was silent, and everyone stood up and turnedtowards the stream. Alexey Alexandrovitch took no interest in the race,and so he did not watch the racers, but fell listlessly to scanning thespectators with his weary eyes. His eyes rested upon Anna.
Her face was white and set. She was obviously seeing nothing and no onebut one man. Her hand had convulsively clutched her fan, and she heldher breath. He looked at her and hastily turned away, scrutinizing otherfaces.
"But here’s this lady too, and others very much moved as well; it’s verynatural," Alexey Alexandrovitch told himself. He tried not to look ather, but unconsciously his eyes were drawn to her. He examined that faceagain, trying not to read what was so plainly written on it, and againsthis own will, with horror read on it what he did not want to know.
The first fall—Kuzovlev’s, at the stream—agitated everyone, but AlexeyAlexandrovitch saw distinctly on Anna’s pale, triumphant face that theman she was watching had not fallen. When, after Mahotin and Vronsky hadcleared the worst barrier, the next officer had been thrown straight onhis head at it and fatally injured, and a shudder of horror passed overthe whole public, Alexey Alexandrovitch saw that Anna did not evennotice it, and had some difficulty in realizing what they were talkingof about her. But more and more often, and with greater persistence, hewatched her. Anna, wholly engrossed as she was with the race, becameaware of her husband’s cold eyes fixed upon her from one side.
She glanced round for an instant, looked inquiringly at him, and with aslight frown turned away again.
"Ah, I don’t care!" she seemed to say to him, and she did not onceglance at him again.
The race was an unlucky one, and of the seventeen officers who rode init more than half were thrown and hurt. Towards the end of the raceeveryone was in a state of agitation, which was intensified by the factthat the Tsar was displeased.


Chapter 29

Everyone was loudly expressing disapprobation, everyone was repeating aphrase some one had uttered—"The lions and gladiators will be the nextthing," and everyone was feeling horrified; so that when Vronsky fell tothe ground, and Anna moaned aloud, there was nothing very out of the wayin it. But afterwards a change came over Anna’s face which really wasbeyond decorum. She utterly lost her head. She began fluttering like acaged bird, at one moment would have got up and moved away, at the nextturned to Betsy.
"Let us go, let us go!" she said.
But Betsy did not hear her. She was bending down, talking to a generalwho had come up to her.
Alexey Alexandrovitch went up to Anna and courteously offered her hisarm.
"Let us go, if you like," he said in French, but Anna was listening tothe general and did not notice her husband.
"He’s broken his leg too, so they say," the general was saying. "This isbeyond everything."
Without answering her husband, Anna lifted her opera glass and gazedtowards the place where Vronsky had fallen; but it was so far off, andthere was such a crowd of people about it, that she could make outnothing. She laid down the opera glass, and would have moved away, butat that moment an officer galloped up and made some announcement to theTsar. Anna craned forward, listening.
"Stiva! Stiva!" she cried to her brother.
But her brother did not hear her. Again she would have moved away.
"Once more I offer you my arm if you want to be going," said AlexeyAlexandrovitch, reaching towards her hand.
She drew back from him with aversion, and without looking in his faceanswered:
"No, no, let me be, I’ll stay."
She saw now that from the place of Vronsky’s accident an officer wasrunning across the course towards the pavilion. Betsy waved herhandkerchief to him. The officer brought the news that the rider was notkilled, but the horse had broken its back.
On hearing this Anna sat down hurriedly, and hid her face in her fan.Alexey Alexandrovitch saw that she was weeping, and could not controlher tears, nor even the sobs that were shaking her bosom. AlexeyAlexandrovitch stood so as to screen her, giving her time to recoverherself.
"For the third time I offer you my arm," he said to her after a littletime, turning to her. Anna gazed at him and did not know what to say.Princess Betsy came to her rescue.
"No, Alexey Alexandrovitch; I brought Anna and I promised to take herhome," put in Betsy.
"Excuse me, princess," he said, smiling courteously but looking her veryfirmly in the face, "but I see that Anna’s not very well, and I wish herto come home with me."
Anna looked about her in a frightened way, got up submissively, and laidher hand on her husband’s arm.
"I’ll send to him and find out, and let you know," Betsy whispered toher.
As they left the pavilion, Alexey Alexandrovitch, as always, talked tothose he met, and Anna had, as always, to talk and answer; but she wasutterly beside herself, and moved hanging on her husband’s arm as thoughin a dream.
"Is he killed or not? Is it true? Will he come or not? Shall I see himtoday?" she was thinking.
She took her seat in her husband’s carriage in silence, and in silencedrove out of the crowd of carriages. In spite of all he had seen, AlexeyAlexandrovitch still did not allow himself to consider his wife’s realcondition. He merely saw the outward symptoms. He saw that she wasbehaving unbecomingly, and considered it his duty to tell her so. But itwas very difficult for him not to say more, to tell her nothing butthat. He opened his mouth to tell her she had behaved unbecomingly, buthe could not help saying something utterly different.
"What an inclination we all have, though, for these cruel spectacles,"he said. "I observe..."
"Eh? I don’t understand," said Anna contemptuously.
He was offended, and at once began to say what he had meant to say.
"I am obliged to tell you," he began.
"So now we are to have it out," she thought, and she felt frightened.
"I am obliged to tell you that your behavior has been unbecoming today,"he said to her in French.
"In what way has my behavior been unbecoming?" she said aloud, turningher head swiftly and looking him straight in the face, not with thebright expression that seemed covering something, but with a look ofdetermination, under which she concealed with difficulty the dismay shewas feeling.
"Mind," he said, pointing to the open window opposite the coachman.
He got up and pulled up the window.
"What did you consider unbecoming?" she repeated.
"The despair you were unable to conceal at the accident to one of theriders."
He waited for her to answer, but she was silent, looking straight beforeher.
"I have already begged you so to conduct yourself in society that evenmalicious tongues can find nothing to say against you. There was a timewhen I spoke of your inward attitude, but I am not speaking of that now.Now I speak only of your external attitude. You have behaved improperly,and I would wish it not to occur again."
She did not hear half of what he was saying; she felt panic-strickenbefore him, and was thinking whether it was true that Vronsky was notkilled. Was it of him they were speaking when they said the rider wasunhurt, but the horse had broken its back? She merely smiled with apretense of irony when he finished, and made no reply, because she hadnot heard what he said. Alexey Alexandrovitch had begun to speak boldly,but as he realized plainly what he was speaking of, the dismay she wasfeeling infected him too. He saw the smile, and a strangemisapprehension came over him.
"She is smiling at my suspicions. Yes, she will tell me directly whatshe told me before; that there is no foundation for my suspicions, thatit’s absurd."
At that moment, when the revelation of everything was hanging over him,there was nothing he expected so much as that she would answer mockinglyas before that his suspicions were absurd and utterly groundless. Soterrible to him was what he knew that now he was ready to believeanything. But the expression of her face, scared and gloomy, did not nowpromise even deception.
"Possibly I was mistaken," said he. "If so, I beg your pardon."
"No, you were not mistaken," she said deliberately, looking desperatelyinto his cold face. "You were not mistaken. I was, and I could not helpbeing in despair. I hear you, but I am thinking of him. I love him, I amhis mistress; I can’t bear you; I’m afraid of you, and I hate you....You can do what you like to me."
And dropping back into the corner of the carriage, she broke into sobs,hiding her face in her hands. Alexey Alexandrovitch did not stir, andkept looking straight before him. But his whole face suddenly bore thesolemn rigidity of the dead, and his expression did not change duringthe whole time of the drive home. On reaching the house he turned hishead to her, still with the same expression.
"Very well! But I expect a strict observance of the external forms ofpropriety till such time"—his voice shook—"as I may take measures tosecure my honor and communicate them to you."
He got out first and helped her to get out. Before the servants hepressed her hand, took his seat in the carriage, and drove back toPetersburg. Immediately afterwards a footman came from Princess Betsyand brought Anna a note.
"I sent to Alexey to find out how he is, and he writes me he is quitewell and unhurt, but in despair."
"So _he_ will be here," she thought. "What a good thing I told him all!"
She glanced at her watch. She had still three hours to wait, and thememories of their last meeting set her blood in flame.
"My God, how light it is! It’s dreadful, but I do love to see his face,and I do love this fantastic light.... My husband! Oh! yes.... Well,thank God! everything’s over with him."


Chapter 30

In the little German watering-place to which the Shtcherbatskys hadbetaken themselves, as in all places indeed where people are gatheredtogether, the usual process, as it were, of the crystallization ofsociety went on, assigning to each member of that society a definite andunalterable place. Just as the particle of water in frost, definitelyand unalterably, takes the special form of the crystal of snow, so eachnew person that arrived at the springs was at once placed in his specialplace.
_Fürst_ Shtcherbatsky, _sammt Gemahlin und Tochter_, by the apartmentsthey took, and from their name and from the friends they made, wereimmediately crystallized into a definite place marked out for them.
There was visiting the watering-place that year a real German Fürstin,in consequence of which the crystallizing process went on morevigorously than ever. Princess Shtcherbatskaya wished, above everything,to present her daughter to this German princess, and the day after theirarrival she duly performed this rite. Kitty made a low and gracefulcurtsey in the _very simple_, that is to say, very elegant frock thathad been ordered her from Paris. The German princess said, "I hope theroses will soon come back to this pretty little face," and for theShtcherbatskys certain definite lines of existence were at once laiddown from which there was no departing. The Shtcherbatskys made theacquaintance too of the family of an English Lady Somebody, and of aGerman countess and her son, wounded in the last war, and of a learnedSwede, and of M. Canut and his sister. But yet inevitably theShtcherbatskys were thrown most into the society of a Moscow lady, MaryaYevgenyevna Rtishtcheva and her daughter, whom Kitty disliked, becauseshe had fallen ill, like herself, over a love affair, and a Moscowcolonel, whom Kitty had known from childhood, and always seen in uniformand epaulets, and who now, with his little eyes and his open neck andflowered cravat, was uncommonly ridiculous and tedious, because therewas no getting rid of him. When all this was so firmly established,Kitty began to be very much bored, especially as the prince went away toCarlsbad and she was left alone with her mother. She took no interest inthe people she knew, feeling that nothing fresh would come of them. Herchief mental interest in the watering-place consisted in watching andmaking theories about the people she did not know. It was characteristicof Kitty that she always imagined everything in people in the mostfavorable light possible, especially so in those she did not know. Andnow as she made surmises as to who people were, what were theirrelations to one another, and what they were like, Kitty endowed themwith the most marvelous and noble characters, and found confirmation ofher idea in her observations.
Of these people the one that attracted her most was a Russian girl whohad come to the watering-place with an invalid Russian lady, MadameStahl, as everyone called her. Madame Stahl belonged to the highestsociety, but she was so ill that she could not walk, and only onexceptionally fine days made her appearance at the springs in an invalidcarriage. But it was not so much from ill-health as from pride—soPrincess Shtcherbatskaya interpreted it—that Madame Stahl had not madethe acquaintance of anyone among the Russians there. The Russian girllooked after Madame Stahl, and besides that, she was, as Kitty observed,on friendly terms with all the invalids who were seriously ill, andthere were many of them at the springs, and looked after them in themost natural way. This Russian girl was not, as Kitty gathered, relatedto Madame Stahl, nor was she a paid attendant. Madame Stahl called herVarenka, and other people called her "Mademoiselle Varenka." Apart fromthe interest Kitty took in this girl’s relations with Madame Stahl andwith other unknown persons, Kitty, as often happened, felt aninexplicable attraction to Mademoiselle Varenka, and was aware whentheir eyes met that she too liked her.
Of Mademoiselle Varenka one would not say that she had passed her firstyouth, but she was, as it were, a creature without youth; she might havebeen taken for nineteen or for thirty. If her features were criticizedseparately, she was handsome rather than plain, in spite of the sicklyhue of her face. She would have been a good figure, too, if it had notbeen for her extreme thinness and the size of her head, which was toolarge for her medium height. But she was not likely to be attractive tomen. She was like a fine flower, already past its bloom and withoutfragrance, though the petals were still unwithered. Moreover, she wouldhave been unattractive to men also from the lack of just what Kitty hadtoo much of—of the suppressed fire of vitality, and the consciousness ofher own attractiveness.
She always seemed absorbed in work about which there could be no doubt,and so it seemed she could not take interest in anything outside it. Itwas just this contrast with her own position that was for Kitty thegreat attraction of Mademoiselle Varenka. Kitty felt that in her, in hermanner of life, she would find an example of what she was now sopainfully seeking: interest in life, a dignity in life—apart from theworldly relations of girls with men, which so revolted Kitty, andappeared to her now as a shameful hawking about of goods in search of apurchaser. The more attentively Kitty watched her unknown friend, themore convinced she was this girl was the perfect creature she fanciedher, and the more eagerly she wished to make her acquaintance.
The two girls used to meet several times a day, and every time they met,Kitty’s eyes said: "Who are you? What are you? Are you really theexquisite creature I imagine you to be? But for goodness’ sake don’tsuppose," her eyes added, "that I would force my acquaintance on you, Isimply admire you and like you." "I like you too, and you’re very, verysweet. And I should like you better still, if I had time," answered theeyes of the unknown girl. Kitty saw indeed, that she was always busy.Either she was taking the children of a Russian family home from thesprings, or fetching a shawl for a sick lady, and wrapping her up in it,or trying to interest an irritable invalid, or selecting and buyingcakes for tea for someone.
Soon after the arrival of the Shtcherbatskys there appeared in themorning crowd at the springs two persons who attracted universal andunfavorable attention. These were a tall man with a stooping figure, andhuge hands, in an old coat too short for him, with black, simple, andyet terrible eyes, and a pockmarked, kind-looking woman, very badly andtastelessly dressed. Recognizing these persons as Russians, Kitty hadalready in her imagination begun constructing a delightful and touchingromance about them. But the princess, having ascertained from thevisitors’ list that this was Nikolay Levin and Marya Nikolaevna,explained to Kitty what a bad man this Levin was, and all her fanciesabout these two people vanished. Not so much from what her mother toldher, as from the fact that it was Konstantin’s brother, this pairsuddenly seemed to Kitty intensely unpleasant. This Levin, with hiscontinual twitching of his head, aroused in her now an irrepressiblefeeling of disgust.
It seemed to her that his big, terrible eyes, which persistently pursuedher, expressed a feeling of hatred and contempt, and she tried to avoidmeeting him.


Chapter 31

It was a wet day; it had been raining all the morning, and the invalids,with their parasols, had flocked into the arcades.
Kitty was walking there with her mother and the Moscow colonel, smartand jaunty in his European coat, bought ready-made at Frankfort. Theywere walking on one side of the arcade, trying to avoid Levin, who waswalking on the other side. Varenka, in her dark dress, in a black hatwith a turn-down brim, was walking up and down the whole length of thearcade with a blind Frenchwoman, and, every time she met Kitty, theyexchanged friendly glances.
"Mamma, couldn’t I speak to her?" said Kitty, watching her unknownfriend, and noticing that she was going up to the spring, and that theymight come there together.
"Oh, if you want to so much, I’ll find out about her first and make heracquaintance myself," answered her mother. "What do you see in her outof the way? A companion, she must be. If you like, I’ll makeacquaintance with Madame Stahl; I used to know her _belle-soeur_," addedthe princess, lifting her head haughtily.
Kitty knew that the princess was offended that Madame Stahl had seemedto avoid making her acquaintance. Kitty did not insist.
"How wonderfully sweet she is!" she said, gazing at Varenka just as shehanded a glass to the Frenchwoman. "Look how natural and sweet it allis."
"It’s so funny to see your _engouements_," said the princess. "No, we’dbetter go back," she added, noticing Levin coming towards them with hiscompanion and a German doctor, to whom he was talking very noisily andangrily.
They turned to go back, when suddenly they heard, not noisy talk, butshouting. Levin, stopping short, was shouting at the doctor, and thedoctor, too, was excited. A crowd gathered about them. The princess andKitty beat a hasty retreat, while the colonel joined the crowd to findout what was the matter.
A few minutes later the colonel overtook them.
"What was it?" inquired the princess.
"Scandalous and disgraceful!" answered the colonel. "The one thing to bedreaded is meeting Russians abroad. That tall gentleman was abusing thedoctor, flinging all sorts of insults at him because he wasn’t treatinghim quite as he liked, and he began waving his stick at him. It’s simplya scandal!"
"Oh, how unpleasant!" said the princess. "Well, and how did it end?"
"Luckily at that point that ... the one in the mushroom hat ...intervened. A Russian lady, I think she is," said the colonel.
"Mademoiselle Varenka?" asked Kitty.
"Yes, yes. She came to the rescue before anyone; she took the man by thearm and led him away."
"There, mamma," said Kitty; "you wonder that I’m enthusiastic abouther."
The next day, as she watched her unknown friend, Kitty noticed thatMademoiselle Varenka was already on the same terms with Levin and hiscompanion as with her other _protégés_. She went up to them, enteredinto conversation with them, and served as interpreter for the woman,who could not speak any foreign language.
Kitty began to entreat her mother still more urgently to let her makefriends with Varenka. And, disagreeable as it was to the princess toseem to take the first step in wishing to make the acquaintance ofMadame Stahl, who thought fit to give herself airs, she made inquiriesabout Varenka, and, having ascertained particulars about her tending toprove that there could be no harm though little good in theacquaintance, she herself approached Varenka and made acquaintance withher.
Choosing a time when her daughter had gone to the spring, while Varenkahad stopped outside the baker’s, the princess went up to her.
"Allow me to make your acquaintance," she said, with her dignifiedsmile. "My daughter has lost her heart to you," she said. "Possibly youdo not know me. I am..."
"That feeling is more than reciprocal, princess," Varenka answeredhurriedly.
"What a good deed you did yesterday to our poor compatriot!" said theprincess.
Varenka flushed a little. "I don’t remember. I don’t think I didanything," she said.
"Why, you saved that Levin from disagreeable consequences."
"Yes, _sa compagne_ called me, and I tried to pacify him, he’s very ill,and was dissatisfied with the doctor. I’m used to looking after suchinvalids."
"Yes, I’ve heard you live at Mentone with your aunt—I think—MadameStahl: I used to know her _belle-soeur_."
"No, she’s not my aunt. I call her mamma, but I am not related to her; Iwas brought up by her," answered Varenka, flushing a little again.
This was so simply said, and so sweet was the truthful and candidexpression of her face, that the princess saw why Kitty had taken such afancy to Varenka.
"Well, and what’s this Levin going to do?" asked the princess.
"He’s going away," answered Varenka.
At that instant Kitty came up from the spring beaming with delight thather mother had become acquainted with her unknown friend.
"Well, see, Kitty, your intense desire to make friends withMademoiselle. . ."
"Varenka," Varenka put in smiling, "that’s what everyone calls me."
Kitty blushed with pleasure, and slowly, without speaking, pressed hernew friend’s hand, which did not respond to her pressure, but laymotionless in her hand. The hand did not respond to her pressure, butthe face of Mademoiselle Varenka glowed with a soft, glad, though rathermournful smile, that showed large but handsome teeth.
"I have long wished for this too," she said.
"But you are so busy."
"Oh, no, I’m not at all busy," answered Varenka, but at that moment shehad to leave her new friends because two little Russian girls, childrenof an invalid, ran up to her.
"Varenka, mamma’s calling!" they cried.
And Varenka went after them.


Chapter 32

The particulars which the princess had learned in regard to Varenka’spast and her relations with Madame Stahl were as follows:
Madame Stahl, of whom some people said that she had worried her husbandout of his life, while others said it was he who had made her wretchedby his immoral behavior, had always been a woman of weak health andenthusiastic temperament. When, after her separation from her husband,she gave birth to her only child, the child had died almost immediately,and the family of Madame Stahl, knowing her sensibility, and fearing thenews would kill her, had substituted another child, a baby born the samenight and in the same house in Petersburg, the daughter of the chiefcook of the Imperial Household. This was Varenka. Madame Stahl learnedlater on that Varenka was not her own child, but she went on bringingher up, especially as very soon afterwards Varenka had not a relation ofher own living. Madame Stahl had now been living more than ten yearscontinuously abroad, in the south, never leaving her couch. And somepeople said that Madame Stahl had made her social position as aphilanthropic, highly religious woman; other people said she really wasat heart the highly ethical being, living for nothing but the good ofher fellow creatures, which she represented herself to be. No one knewwhat her faith was—Catholic, Protestant, or Orthodox. But one fact wasindubitable—she was in amicable relations with the highest dignitariesof all the churches and sects.
Varenka lived with her all the while abroad, and everyone who knewMadame Stahl knew and liked Mademoiselle Varenka, as everyone calledher.
Having learned all these facts, the princess found nothing to object toin her daughter’s intimacy with Varenka, more especially as Varenka’sbreeding and education were of the best—she spoke French and Englishextremely well—and what was of the most weight, brought a message fromMadame Stahl expressing her regret that she was prevented by her illhealth from making the acquaintance of the princess.
After getting to know Varenka, Kitty became more and more fascinated byher friend, and every day she discovered new virtues in her.
The princess, hearing that Varenka had a good voice, asked her to comeand sing to them in the evening.
"Kitty plays, and we have a piano; not a good one, it’s true, but youwill give us so much pleasure," said the princess with her affectedsmile, which Kitty disliked particularly just then, because she noticedthat Varenka had no inclination to sing. Varenka came, however, in theevening and brought a roll of music with her. The princess had invitedMarya Yevgenyevna and her daughter and the colonel.
Varenka seemed quite unaffected by there being persons present she didnot know, and she went directly to the piano. She could not accompanyherself, but she could sing music at sight very well. Kitty, who playedwell, accompanied her.
"You have an extraordinary talent," the princess said to her afterVarenka had sung the first song extremely well.
Marya Yevgenyevna and her daughter expressed their thanks andadmiration.
"Look," said the colonel, looking out of the window, "what an audiencehas collected to listen to you." There actually was quite a considerablecrowd under the windows.
"I am very glad it gives you pleasure," Varenka answered simply.
Kitty looked with pride at her friend. She was enchanted by her talent,and her voice, and her face, but most of all by her manner, by the wayVarenka obviously thought nothing of her singing and was quite unmovedby their praises. She seemed only to be asking: "Am I to sing again, oris that enough?"
"If it had been I," thought Kitty, "how proud I should have been! Howdelighted I should have been to see that crowd under the windows! Butshe’s utterly unmoved by it. Her only motive is to avoid refusing and toplease mamma. What is there in her? What is it gives her the power tolook down on everything, to be calm independently of everything? How Ishould like to know it and to learn it of her!" thought Kitty, gazinginto her serene face. The princess asked Varenka to sing again, andVarenka sang another song, also smoothly, distinctly, and well, standingerect at the piano and beating time on it with her thin, dark-skinnedhand.
The next song in the book was an Italian one. Kitty played the openingbars, and looked round at Varenka.
"Let’s skip that," said Varenka, flushing a little. Kitty let her eyesrest on Varenka’s face, with a look of dismay and inquiry.
"Very well, the next one," she said hurriedly, turning over the pages,and at once feeling that there was something connected with the song.
"No," answered Varenka with a smile, laying her hand on the music, "no,let’s have that one." And she sang it just as quietly, as coolly, and aswell as the others.
When she had finished, they all thanked her again, and went off to tea.Kitty and Varenka went out into the little garden that adjoined thehouse.
"Am I right, that you have some reminiscences connected with that song?"said Kitty. "Don’t tell me," she added hastily, "only say if I’m right."
"No, why not? I’ll tell you simply," said Varenka, and, without waitingfor a reply, she went on: "Yes, it brings up memories, once painfulones. I cared for someone once, and I used to sing him that song."
Kitty with big, wide-open eyes gazed silently, sympathetically atVarenka.
"I cared for him, and he cared for me; but his mother did not wish it,and he married another girl. He’s living now not far from us, and I seehim sometimes. You didn’t think I had a love story too," she said, andthere was a faint gleam in her handsome face of that fire which Kittyfelt must once have glowed all over her.
"I didn’t think so? Why, if I were a man, I could never care for anyoneelse after knowing you. Only I can’t understand how he could, to pleasehis mother, forget you and make you unhappy; he had no heart."
"Oh, no, he’s a very good man, and I’m not unhappy; quite the contrary,I’m very happy. Well, so we shan’t be singing any more now," she added,turning towards the house.
"How good you are! how good you are!" cried Kitty, and stopping her, shekissed her. "If I could only be even a little like you!"
"Why should you be like anyone? You’re nice as you are," said Varenka,smiling her gentle, weary smile.
"No, I’m not nice at all. Come, tell me.... Stop a minute, let’s sitdown," said Kitty, making her sit down again beside her. "Tell me, isn’tit humiliating to think that a man has disdained your love, that hehasn’t cared for it?..."
"But he didn’t disdain it; I believe he cared for me, but he was adutiful son..."
"Yes, but if it hadn’t been on account of his mother, if it had been hisown doing?..." said Kitty, feeling she was giving away her secret, andthat her face, burning with the flush of shame, had betrayed heralready.
"In that case he would have done wrong, and I should not have regrettedhim," answered Varenka, evidently realizing that they were now talkingnot of her, but of Kitty.
"But the humiliation," said Kitty, "the humiliation one can neverforget, can never forget," she said, remembering her look at the lastball during the pause in the music.
"Where is the humiliation? Why, you did nothing wrong?"
"Worse than wrong—shameful."
Varenka shook her head and laid her hand on Kitty’s hand.
"Why, what is there shameful?" she said. "You didn’t tell a man, whodidn’t care for you, that you loved him, did you?"
"Of course not; I never said a word, but he knew it. No, no, there arelooks, there are ways; I can’t forget it, if I live a hundred years."
"Why so? I don’t understand. The whole point is whether you love him nowor not," said Varenka, who called everything by its name.
"I hate him; I can’t forgive myself."
"Why, what for?"
"The shame, the humiliation!"
"Oh! if everyone were as sensitive as you are!" said Varenka. "Thereisn’t a girl who hasn’t been through the same. And it’s all sounimportant."
"Why, what is important?" said Kitty, looking into her face withinquisitive wonder.
"Oh, there’s so much that’s important," said Varenka, smiling.
"Why, what?"
"Oh, so much that’s more important," answered Varenka, not knowing whatto say. But at that instant they heard the princess’s voice from thewindow. "Kitty, it’s cold! Either get a shawl, or come indoors."
"It really is time to go in!" said Varenka, getting up. "I have to go onto Madame Berthe’s; she asked me to."
Kitty held her by the hand, and with passionate curiosity and entreatyher eyes asked her: "What is it, what is this of such importance thatgives you such tranquillity? You know, tell me!" But Varenka did noteven know what Kitty’s eyes were asking her. She merely thought that shehad to go to see Madame Berthe too that evening, and to make haste homein time for _maman’s_ tea at twelve o’clock. She went indoors, collectedher music, and saying good-bye to everyone, was about to go.
"Allow me to see you home," said the colonel.
"Yes, how can you go alone at night like this?" chimed in the princess."Anyway, I’ll send Parasha."
Kitty saw that Varenka could hardly restrain a smile at the idea thatshe needed an escort.
"No, I always go about alone and nothing ever happens to me," she said,taking her hat. And kissing Kitty once more, without saying what wasimportant, she stepped out courageously with the music under her arm andvanished into the twilight of the summer night, bearing away with herher secret of what was important and what gave her the calm and dignityso much to be envied.


Chapter 33

Kitty made the acquaintance of Madame Stahl too, and this acquaintance,together with her friendship with Varenka, did not merely exercise agreat influence on her, it also comforted her in her mental distress.She found this comfort through a completely new world being opened toher by means of this acquaintance, a world having nothing in common withher past, an exalted, noble world, from the height of which she couldcontemplate her past calmly. It was revealed to her that besides theinstinctive life to which Kitty had given herself up hitherto there wasa spiritual life. This life was disclosed in religion, but a religionhaving nothing in common with that one which Kitty had known fromchildhood, and which found expression in litanies and all-night servicesat the Widow’s Home, where one might meet one’s friends, and in learningby heart Slavonic texts with the priest. This was a lofty, mysteriousreligion connected with a whole series of noble thoughts and feelings,which one could do more than merely believe because one was told to,which one could love.
Kitty found all this out not from words. Madame Stahl talked to Kitty asto a charming child that one looks on with pleasure as on the memory ofone’s youth, and only once she said in passing that in all human sorrowsnothing gives comfort but love and faith, and that in the sight ofChrist’s compassion for us no sorrow is trifling—and immediately talkedof other things. But in every gesture of Madame Stahl, in every word, inevery heavenly—as Kitty called it—look, and above all in the whole storyof her life, which she heard from Varenka, Kitty recognized thatsomething "that was important," of which, till then, she had knownnothing.
Yet, elevated as Madame Stahl’s character was, touching as was herstory, and exalted and moving as was her speech, Kitty could not helpdetecting in her some traits which perplexed her. She noticed that whenquestioning her about her family, Madame Stahl had smiledcontemptuously, which was not in accord with Christian meekness. Shenoticed, too, that when she had found a Catholic priest with her, MadameStahl had studiously kept her face in the shadow of the lamp-shade andhad smiled in a peculiar way. Trivial as these two observations were,they perplexed her, and she had her doubts as to Madame Stahl. But onthe other hand Varenka, alone in the world, without friends orrelations, with a melancholy disappointment in the past, desiringnothing, regretting nothing, was just that perfection of which Kittydared hardly dream. In Varenka she realized that one has but to forgetoneself and love others, and one will be calm, happy, and noble. Andthat was what Kitty longed to be. Seeing now clearly what was _the mostimportant_, Kitty was not satisfied with being enthusiastic over it; sheat once gave herself up with her whole soul to the new life that wasopening to her. From Varenka’s accounts of the doings of Madame Stahland other people whom she mentioned, Kitty had already constructed theplan of her own future life. She would, like Madame Stahl’s niece,Aline, of whom Varenka had talked to her a great deal, seek out thosewho were in trouble, wherever she might be living, help them as far asshe could, give them the Gospel, read the Gospel to the sick, tocriminals, to the dying. The idea of reading the Gospel to criminals, asAline did, particularly fascinated Kitty. But all these were secretdreams, of which Kitty did not talk either to her mother or to Varenka.
While awaiting the time for carrying out her plans on a large scale,however, Kitty, even then at the springs, where there were so manypeople ill and unhappy, readily found a chance for practicing her newprinciples in imitation of Varenka.
At first the princess noticed nothing but that Kitty was much under theinfluence of her _engouement_, as she called it, for Madame Stahl, andstill more for Varenka. She saw that Kitty did not merely imitateVarenka in her conduct, but unconsciously imitated her in her manner ofwalking, of talking, of blinking her eyes. But later on the princessnoticed that, apart from this adoration, some kind of serious spiritualchange was taking place in her daughter.
The princess saw that in the evenings Kitty read a French testament thatMadame Stahl had given her—a thing she had never done before; that sheavoided society acquaintances and associated with the sick people whowere under Varenka’s protection, and especially one poor family, that ofa sick painter, Petrov. Kitty was unmistakably proud of playing the partof a sister of mercy in that family. All this was well enough, and theprincess had nothing to say against it, especially as Petrov’s wife wasa perfectly nice sort of woman, and that the German princess, noticingKitty’s devotion, praised her, calling her an angel of consolation. Allthis would have been very well, if there had been no exaggeration. Butthe princess saw that her daughter was rushing into extremes, and soindeed she told her.
"_Il ne faut jamais rien outrer_," she said to her.
Her daughter made her no reply, only in her heart she thought that onecould not talk about exaggeration where Christianity was concerned. Whatexaggeration could there be in the practice of a doctrine wherein onewas bidden to turn the other cheek when one was smitten, and give one’scloak if one’s coat were taken? But the princess disliked thisexaggeration, and disliked even more the fact that she felt her daughterdid not care to show her all her heart. Kitty did in fact conceal hernew views and feelings from her mother. She concealed them not becauseshe did not respect or did not love her mother, but simply because shewas her mother. She would have revealed them to anyone sooner than toher mother.
"How is it Anna Pavlovna’s not been to see us for so long?" the princesssaid one day of Madame Petrova. "I’ve asked her, but she seems put outabout something."
"No, I’ve not noticed it, maman," said Kitty, flushing hotly.
"Is it long since you went to see them?"
"We’re meaning to make an expedition to the mountains tomorrow,"answered Kitty.
"Well, you can go," answered the princess, gazing at her daughter’sembarrassed face and trying to guess the cause of her embarrassment.
That day Varenka came to dinner and told them that Anna Pavlovna hadchanged her mind and given up the expedition for the morrow. And theprincess noticed again that Kitty reddened.
"Kitty, haven’t you had some misunderstanding with the Petrovs?" saidthe princess, when they were left alone. "Why has she given up sendingthe children and coming to see us?"
Kitty answered that nothing had happened between them, and that shecould not tell why Anna Pavlovna seemed displeased with her. Kittyanswered perfectly truly. She did not know the reason Anna Pavlovna hadchanged to her, but she guessed it. She guessed at something which shecould not tell her mother, which she did not put into words to herself.It was one of those things which one knows but which one can never speakof even to oneself, so terrible and shameful would it be to be mistaken.
Again and again she went over in her memory all her relations with thefamily. She remembered the simple delight expressed on the round,good-humored face of Anna Pavlovna at their meetings; she rememberedtheir secret confabulations about the invalid, their plots to draw himaway from the work which was forbidden him, and to get him out-of-doors;the devotion of the youngest boy, who used to call her "my Kitty," andwould not go to bed without her. How nice it all was! Then she recalledthe thin, terribly thin figure of Petrov, with his long neck, in hisbrown coat, his scant, curly hair, his questioning blue eyes that wereso terrible to Kitty at first, and his painful attempts to seem heartyand lively in her presence. She recalled the efforts she had made atfirst to overcome the repugnance she felt for him, as for allconsumptive people, and the pains it had cost her to think of things tosay to him. She recalled the timid, softened look with which he gazed ather, and the strange feeling of compassion and awkwardness, and later ofa sense of her own goodness, which she had felt at it. How nice it allwas! But all that was at first. Now, a few days ago, everything wassuddenly spoiled. Anna Pavlovna had met Kitty with affected cordiality,and had kept continual watch on her and on her husband.
Could that touching pleasure he showed when she came near be the causeof Anna Pavlovna’s coolness?
"Yes," she mused, "there was something unnatural about Anna Pavlovna,and utterly unlike her good nature, when she said angrily the day beforeyesterday: ‘There, he will keep waiting for you; he wouldn’t drink hiscoffee without you, though he’s grown so dreadfully weak.’"
"Yes, perhaps, too, she didn’t like it when I gave him the rug. It wasall so simple, but he took it so awkwardly, and was so long thanking me,that I felt awkward too. And then that portrait of me he did so well.And most of all that look of confusion and tenderness! Yes, yes, that’sit!" Kitty repeated to herself with horror. "No, it can’t be, itoughtn’t to be! He’s so much to be pitied!" she said to herself directlyafter.
This doubt poisoned the charm of her new life.


Chapter 34

Before the end of the course of drinking the waters, PrinceShtcherbatsky, who had gone on from Carlsbad to Baden and Kissingen toRussian friends—to get a breath of Russian air, as he said—came back tohis wife and daughter.
The views of the prince and of the princess on life abroad werecompletely opposed. The princess thought everything delightful, and inspite of her established position in Russian society, she tried abroadto be like a European fashionable lady, which she was not—for the simplereason that she was a typical Russian gentlewoman; and so she wasaffected, which did not altogether suit her. The prince, on thecontrary, thought everything foreign detestable, got sick of Europeanlife, kept to his Russian habits, and purposely tried to show himselfabroad less European than he was in reality.
The prince returned thinner, with the skin hanging in loose bags on hischeeks, but in the most cheerful frame of mind. His good humor was evengreater when he saw Kitty completely recovered. The news of Kitty’sfriendship with Madame Stahl and Varenka, and the reports the princessgave him of some kind of change she had noticed in Kitty, troubled theprince and aroused his habitual feeling of jealousy of everything thatdrew his daughter away from him, and a dread that his daughter mighthave got out of the reach of his influence into regions inaccessible tohim. But these unpleasant matters were all drowned in the sea ofkindliness and good humor which was always within him, and more so thanever since his course of Carlsbad waters.
The day after his arrival the prince, in his long overcoat, with hisRussian wrinkles and baggy cheeks propped up by a starched collar, setoff with his daughter to the spring in the greatest good humor.
It was a lovely morning: the bright, cheerful houses with their littlegardens, the sight of the red-faced, red-armed, beer-drinking Germanwaitresses, working away merrily, did the heart good. But the nearerthey got to the springs the oftener they met sick people; and theirappearance seemed more pitiable than ever among the everyday conditionsof prosperous German life. Kitty was no longer struck by this contrast.The bright sun, the brilliant green of the foliage, the strains of themusic were for her the natural setting of all these familiar faces, withtheir changes to greater emaciation or to convalescence, for which shewatched. But to the prince the brightness and gaiety of the Junemorning, and the sound of the orchestra playing a gay waltz then infashion, and above all, the appearance of the healthy attendants, seemedsomething unseemly and monstrous, in conjunction with these slowlymoving, dying figures gathered together from all parts of Europe. Inspite of his feeling of pride and, as it were, of the return of youth,with his favorite daughter on his arm, he felt awkward, and almostashamed of his vigorous step and his sturdy, stout limbs. He felt almostlike a man not dressed in a crowd.
"Present me to your new friends," he said to his daughter, squeezing herhand with his elbow. "I like even your horrid Soden for making you sowell again. Only it’s melancholy, very melancholy here. Who’s that?"
Kitty mentioned the names of all the people they met, with some of whomshe was acquainted and some not. At the entrance of the garden they metthe blind lady, Madame Berthe, with her guide, and the prince wasdelighted to see the old Frenchwoman’s face light up when she heardKitty’s voice. She at once began talking to him with French exaggeratedpoliteness, applauding him for having such a delightful daughter,extolling Kitty to the skies before her face, and calling her atreasure, a pearl, and a consoling angel.
"Well, she’s the second angel, then," said the prince, smiling. "shecalls Mademoiselle Varenka angel number one."
"Oh! Mademoiselle Varenka, she’s a real angel, allez," Madame Bertheassented.
In the arcade they met Varenka herself. She was walking rapidly towardsthem carrying an elegant red bag.
"Here is papa come," Kitty said to her.
Varenka made—simply and naturally as she did everything—a movementbetween a bow and a curtsey, and immediately began talking to theprince, without shyness, naturally, as she talked to everyone.
"Of course I know you; I know you very well," the prince said to herwith a smile, in which Kitty detected with joy that her father liked herfriend. "Where are you off to in such haste?"
"Maman’s here," she said, turning to Kitty. "She has not slept allnight, and the doctor advised her to go out. I’m taking her her work."
"So that’s angel number one?" said the prince when Varenka had gone on.
Kitty saw that her father had meant to make fun of Varenka, but that hecould not do it because he liked her.
"Come, so we shall see all your friends," he went on, "even MadameStahl, if she deigns to recognize me."
"Why, did you know her, papa?" Kitty asked apprehensively, catching thegleam of irony that kindled in the prince’s eyes at the mention ofMadame Stahl.
"I used to know her husband, and her too a little, before she’d joinedthe Pietists."
"What is a Pietist, papa?" asked Kitty, dismayed to find that what sheprized so highly in Madame Stahl had a name.
"I don’t quite know myself. I only know that she thanks God foreverything, for every misfortune, and thanks God too that her husbanddied. And that’s rather droll, as they didn’t get on together."
"Who’s that? What a piteous face!" he asked, noticing a sick man ofmedium height sitting on a bench, wearing a brown overcoat and whitetrousers that fell in strange folds about his long, fleshless legs. Thisman lifted his straw hat, showed his scanty curly hair and highforehead, painfully reddened by the pressure of the hat.
"That’s Petrov, an artist," answered Kitty, blushing. "And that’s hiswife," she added, indicating Anna Pavlovna, who, as though on purpose,at the very instant they approached walked away after a child that hadrun off along a path.
"Poor fellow! and what a nice face he has!" said the prince. "Why don’tyou go up to him? He wanted to speak to you."
"Well, let us go, then," said Kitty, turning round resolutely. "How areyou feeling today?" she asked Petrov.
Petrov got up, leaning on his stick, and looked shyly at the prince.
"This is my daughter," said the prince. "Let me introduce myself."
The painter bowed and smiled, showing his strangely dazzling whiteteeth.
"We expected you yesterday, princess," he said to Kitty. He staggered ashe said this, and then repeated the motion, trying to make it seem as ifit had been intentional.
"I meant to come, but Varenka said that Anna Pavlovna sent word you werenot going."
"Not going!" said Petrov, blushing, and immediately beginning to cough,and his eyes sought his wife. "Anita! Anita!" he said loudly, and theswollen veins stood out like cords on his thin white neck.
Anna Pavlovna came up.
"So you sent word to the princess that we weren’t going!" he whisperedto her angrily, losing his voice.
"Good morning, princess," said Anna Pavlovna, with an assumed smileutterly unlike her former manner. "Very glad to make your acquaintance,"she said to the prince. "You’ve long been expected, prince."
"What did you send word to the princess that we weren’t going for?" theartist whispered hoarsely once more, still more angrily, obviouslyexasperated that his voice failed him so that he could not give hiswords the expression he would have liked to.
"Oh, mercy on us! I thought we weren’t going," his wife answeredcrossly.
"What, when...." He coughed and waved his hand. The prince took off hishat and moved away with his daughter.
"Ah! ah!" he sighed deeply. "Oh, poor things!"
"Yes, papa," answered Kitty. "And you must know they’ve three children,no servant, and scarcely any means. He gets something from the Academy,"she went on briskly, trying to drown the distress that the queer changein Anna Pavlovna’s manner to her had aroused in her.
"Oh, here’s Madame Stahl," said Kitty, indicating an invalid carriage,where, propped on pillows, something in gray and blue was lying under asunshade. This was Madame Stahl. Behind her stood the gloomy,healthy-looking German workman who pushed the carriage. Close by wasstanding a flaxen-headed Swedish count, whom Kitty knew by name. Severalinvalids were lingering near the low carriage, staring at the lady asthough she were some curiosity.
The prince went up to her, and Kitty detected that disconcerting gleamof irony in his eyes. He went up to Madame Stahl, and addressed her withextreme courtesy and affability in that excellent French that so fewspeak nowadays.
"I don’t know if you remember me, but I must recall myself to thank youfor your kindness to my daughter," he said, taking off his hat and notputting it on again.
"Prince Alexander Shtcherbatsky," said Madame Stahl, lifting upon himher heavenly eyes, in which Kitty discerned a look of annoyance."Delighted! I have taken a great fancy to your daughter."
"You are still in weak health?"
"Yes; I’m used to it," said Madame Stahl, and she introduced the princeto the Swedish count.
"You are scarcely changed at all," the prince said to her. "It’s ten oreleven years since I had the honor of seeing you."
"Yes; God sends the cross and sends the strength to bear it. Often onewonders what is the goal of this life?... The other side!" she saidangrily to Varenka, who had rearranged the rug over her feet not to hersatisfaction.
"To do good, probably," said the prince with a twinkle in his eye.
"That is not for us to judge," said Madame Stahl, perceiving the shadeof expression on the prince’s face. "So you will send me that book, dearcount? I’m very grateful to you," she said to the young Swede.
"Ah!" cried the prince, catching sight of the Moscow colonel standingnear, and with a bow to Madame Stahl he walked away with his daughterand the Moscow colonel, who joined them.
"That’s our aristocracy, prince!" the Moscow colonel said with ironicalintention. He cherished a grudge against Madame Stahl for not making hisacquaintance.
"She’s just the same," replied the prince.
"Did you know her before her illness, prince—that’s to say before shetook to her bed?"
"Yes. She took to her bed before my eyes," said the prince.
"They say it’s ten years since she has stood on her feet."
"She doesn’t stand up because her legs are too short. She’s a very badfigure."
"Papa, it’s not possible!" cried Kitty.
"That’s what wicked tongues say, my darling. And your Varenka catches ittoo," he added. "Oh, these invalid ladies!"
"Oh, no, papa!" Kitty objected warmly. "Varenka worships her. And thenshe does so much good! Ask anyone! Everyone knows her and Aline Stahl."
"Perhaps so," said the prince, squeezing her hand with his elbow; "butit’s better when one does good so that you may ask everyone and no oneknows."
Kitty did not answer, not because she had nothing to say, but becauseshe did not care to reveal her secret thoughts even to her father. But,strange to say, although she had so made up her mind not to beinfluenced by her father’s views, not to let him into her inmostsanctuary, she felt that the heavenly image of Madame Stahl, which shehad carried for a whole month in her heart, had vanished, never toreturn, just as the fantastic figure made up of some clothes thrown downat random vanishes when one sees that it is only some garment lyingthere. All that was left was a woman with short legs, who lay downbecause she had a bad figure, and worried patient Varenka for notarranging her rug to her liking. And by no effort of the imaginationcould Kitty bring back the former Madame Stahl.


Chapter 35

The prince communicated his good humor to his own family and hisfriends, and even to the German landlord in whose rooms theShtcherbatskys were staying.
On coming back with Kitty from the springs, the prince, who had askedthe colonel, and Marya Yevgenyevna, and Varenka all to come and havecoffee with them, gave orders for a table and chairs to be taken intothe garden under the chestnut tree, and lunch to be laid there. Thelandlord and the servants, too, grew brisker under the influence of hisgood spirits. They knew his open-handedness; and half an hour later theinvalid doctor from Hamburg, who lived on the top floor, lookedenviously out of the window at the merry party of healthy Russiansassembled under the chestnut tree. In the trembling circles of shadowcast by the leaves, at a table, covered with a white cloth, and set withcoffeepot, bread-and-butter, cheese, and cold game, sat the princess ina high cap with lilac ribbons, distributing cups and bread-and-butter.At the other end sat the prince, eating heartily, and talking loudly andmerrily. The prince had spread out near him his purchases, carved boxes,and knick-knacks, paper-knives of all sorts, of which he bought a heapat every watering-place, and bestowed them upon everyone, includingLieschen, the servant girl, and the landlord, with whom he jested in hiscomically bad German, assuring him that it was not the water had curedKitty, but his splendid cookery, especially his plum soup. The princesslaughed at her husband for his Russian ways, but she was more lively andgood-humored than she had been all the while she had been at the waters.The colonel smiled, as he always did, at the prince’s jokes, but as faras regards Europe, of which he believed himself to be making a carefulstudy, he took the princess’s side. The simple-hearted Marya Yevgenyevnasimply roared with laughter at everything absurd the prince said, andhis jokes made Varenka helpless with feeble but infectious laughter,which was something Kitty had never seen before.
Kitty was glad of all this, but she could not be light-hearted. Shecould not solve the problem her father had unconsciously set her by hisgoodhumored view of her friends, and of the life that had so attractedher. To this doubt there was joined the change in her relations with thePetrovs, which had been so conspicuously and unpleasantly marked thatmorning. Everyone was good humored, but Kitty could not feel goodhumored, and this increased her distress. She felt a feeling such as shehad known in childhood, when she had been shut in her room as apunishment, and had heard her sisters’ merry laughter outside.
"Well, but what did you buy this mass of things for?" said the princess,smiling, and handing her husband a cup of coffee.
"One goes for a walk, one looks in a shop, and they ask you to buy.‘_Erlaucht, Durchlaucht?_’ Directly they say ‘_Durchlaucht_,’ I can’thold out. I lose ten thalers."
"It’s simply from boredom," said the princess.
"Of course it is. Such boredom, my dear, that one doesn’t know what todo with oneself."
"How can you be bored, prince? There’s so much that’s interesting now inGermany," said Marya Yevgenyevna.
"But I know everything that’s interesting: the plum soup I know, and thepea sausages I know. I know everything."
"No, you may say what you like, prince, there’s the interest of theirinstitutions," said the colonel.
"But what is there interesting about it? They’re all as pleased as brasshalfpence. They’ve conquered everybody, and why am I to be pleased atthat? I haven’t conquered anyone; and I’m obliged to take off my ownboots, yes, and put them away too; in the morning, get up and dress atonce, and go to the dining room to drink bad tea! How different it is athome! You get up in no haste, you get cross, grumble a little, and comeround again. You’ve time to think things over, and no hurry."
"But time’s money, you forget that," said the colonel.
"Time, indeed, that depends! Why, there’s time one would give a month offor sixpence, and time you wouldn’t give half an hour of for any money.Isn’t that so, Katinka? What is it? why are you so depressed?"
"I’m not depressed."
"Where are you off to? Stay a little longer," he said to Varenka.
"I must be going home," said Varenka, getting up, and again she went offinto a giggle. When she had recovered, she said good-bye, and went intothe house to get her hat.
Kitty followed her. Even Varenka struck her as different. She was notworse, but different from what she had fancied her before.
"Oh, dear! it’s a long while since I’ve laughed so much!" said Varenka,gathering up her parasol and her bag. "How nice he is, your father!"
Kitty did not speak.
"When shall I see you again?" asked Varenka.
"Mamma meant to go and see the Petrovs. Won’t you be there?" said Kitty,to try Varenka.
"Yes," answered Varenka. "They’re getting ready to go away, so Ipromised to help them pack."
"Well, I’ll come too, then."
"No, why should you?"
"Why not? why not? why not?" said Kitty, opening her eyes wide, andclutching at Varenka’s parasol, so as not to let her go. "No, wait aminute; why not?"
"Oh, nothing; your father has come, and besides, they will feel awkwardat your helping."
"No, tell me why you don’t want me to be often at the Petrovs’. Youdon’t want me to—why not?"
"I didn’t say that," said Varenka quietly.
"No, please tell me!"
"Tell you everything?" asked Varenka.
"Everything, everything!" Kitty assented.
"Well, there’s really nothing of any consequence; only that MihailAlexeyevitch" (that was the artist’s name) "had meant to leave earlier,and now he doesn’t want to go away," said Varenka, smiling.
"Well, well!" Kitty urged impatiently, looking darkly at Varenka.
"Well, and for some reason Anna Pavlovna told him that he didn’t want togo because you are here. Of course, that was nonsense; but there was adispute over it—over you. You know how irritable these sick people are."
Kitty, scowling more than ever, kept silent, and Varenka went onspeaking alone, trying to soften or soothe her, and seeing a stormcoming—she did not know whether of tears or of words.
"So you’d better not go.... You understand; you won’t be offended?..."
"And it serves me right! And it serves me right!" Kitty cried quickly,snatching the parasol out of Varenka’s hand, and looking past herfriend’s face.
Varenka felt inclined to smile, looking at her childish fury, but shewas afraid of wounding her.
"How does it serve you right? I don’t understand," she said.
"It serves me right, because it was all sham; because it was all done onpurpose, and not from the heart. What business had I to interfere withoutsiders? And so it’s come about that I’m a cause of quarrel, and thatI’ve done what nobody asked me to do. Because it was all a sham! a sham!a sham!..."
"A sham! with what object?" said Varenka gently.
"Oh, it’s so idiotic! so hateful! There was no need whatever for me....Nothing but sham!" she said, opening and shutting the parasol.
"But with what object?"
"To seem better to people, to myself, to God; to deceive everyone. No!now I won’t descend to that. I’ll be bad; but anyway not a liar, acheat."
"But who is a cheat?" said Varenka reproachfully. "You speak as if..."
But Kitty was in one of her gusts of fury, and she would not let herfinish.
"I don’t talk about you, not about you at all. You’re perfection. Yes,yes, I know you’re all perfection; but what am I to do if I’m bad? Thiswould never have been if I weren’t bad. So let me be what I am. I won’tbe a sham. What have I to do with Anna Pavlovna? Let them go their way,and me go mine. I can’t be different.... And yet it’s not that, it’s notthat."
"What is not that?" asked Varenka in bewilderment.
"Everything. I can’t act except from the heart, and you act fromprinciple. I liked you simply, but you most likely only wanted to saveme, to improve me."
"You are unjust," said Varenka.
"But I’m not speaking of other people, I’m speaking of myself."
"Kitty," they heard her mother’s voice, "come here, show papa yournecklace."
Kitty, with a haughty air, without making peace with her friend, tookthe necklace in a little box from the table and went to her mother.
"What’s the matter? Why are you so red?" her mother and father said toher with one voice.
"Nothing," she answered. "I’ll be back directly," and she ran back.
"She’s still here," she thought. "What am I to say to her? Oh, dear!what have I done, what have I said? Why was I rude to her? What am I todo? What am I to say to her?" thought Kitty, and she stopped in thedoorway.
Varenka in her hat and with the parasol in her hands was sitting at thetable examining the spring which Kitty had broken. She lifted her head.
"Varenka, forgive me, do forgive me," whispered Kitty, going up to her."I don’t remember what I said. I..."
"I really didn’t mean to hurt you," said Varenka, smiling.
Peace was made. But with her father’s coming all the world in which shehad been living was transformed for Kitty. She did not give upeverything she had learned, but she became aware that she had deceivedherself in supposing she could be what she wanted to be. Her eyes were,it seemed, opened; she felt all the difficulty of maintaining herselfwithout hypocrisy and self-conceit on the pinnacle to which she hadwished to mount. Moreover, she became aware of all the dreariness of theworld of sorrow, of sick and dying people, in which she had been living.The efforts she had made to like it seemed to her intolerable, and shefelt a longing to get back quickly into the fresh air, to Russia, toErgushovo, where, as she knew from letters, her sister Dolly had alreadygone with her children.
But her affection for Varenka did not wane. As she said good-bye, Kittybegged her to come to them in Russia.
"I’ll come when you get married," said Varenka.
"I shall never marry."
"Well, then, I shall never come."
"Well, then, I shall be married simply for that. Mind now, remember yourpromise," said Kitty.
The doctor’s prediction was fulfilled. Kitty returned home to Russiacured. She was not so gay and thoughtless as before, but she was serene.Her Moscow troubles had become a memory to her.



PART THREE


Chapter 1

Sergey Ivanovitch Koznishev wanted a rest from mental work, and insteadof going abroad as he usually did, he came towards the end of May tostay in the country with his brother. In his judgment the best sort oflife was a country life. He had come now to enjoy such a life at hisbrother’s. Konstantin Levin was very glad to have him, especially as hedid not expect his brother Nikolay that summer. But in spite of hisaffection and respect for Sergey Ivanovitch, Konstantin Levin wasuncomfortable with his brother in the country. It made himuncomfortable, and it positively annoyed him to see his brother’sattitude to the country. To Konstantin Levin the country was thebackground of life, that is of pleasures, endeavors, labor. To SergeyIvanovitch the country meant on one hand rest from work, on the other avaluable antidote to the corrupt influences of town, which he took withsatisfaction and a sense of its utility. To Konstantin Levin the countrywas good first because it afforded a field for labor, of the usefulnessof which there could be no doubt. To Sergey Ivanovitch the country wasparticularly good, because there it was possible and fitting to donothing. Moreover, Sergey Ivanovitch’s attitude to the peasants ratherpiqued Konstantin. Sergey Ivanovitch used to say that he knew and likedthe peasantry, and he often talked to the peasants, which he knew how todo without affectation or condescension, and from every suchconversation he would deduce general conclusions in favor of thepeasantry and in confirmation of his knowing them. Konstantin Levin didnot like such an attitude to the peasants. To Konstantin the peasant wassimply the chief partner in their common labor, and in spite of all therespect and the love, almost like that of kinship, he had for thepeasant—sucked in probably, as he said himself, with the milk of hispeasant nurse—still as a fellow-worker with him, while sometimesenthusiastic over the vigor, gentleness, and justice of these men, hewas very often, when their common labors called for other qualities,exasperated with the peasant for his carelessness, lack of method,drunkenness, and lying. If he had been asked whether he liked or didn’tlike the peasants, Konstantin Levin would have been absolutely at a losswhat to reply. He liked and did not like the peasants, just as he likedand did not like men in general. Of course, being a good-hearted man, heliked men rather than he disliked them, and so too with the peasants.But like or dislike "the people" as something apart he could not, notonly because he lived with "the people," and all his interests werebound up with theirs, but also because he regarded himself as a part of"the people," did not see any special qualities or failingsdistinguishing himself and "the people," and could not contrast himselfwith them. Moreover, although he had lived so long in the closestrelations with the peasants, as farmer and arbitrator, and what wasmore, as adviser (the peasants trusted him, and for thirty miles roundthey would come to ask his advice), he had no definite views of "thepeople," and would have been as much at a loss to answer the questionwhether he knew "the people" as the question whether he liked them. Forhim to say he knew the peasantry would have been the same as to say heknew men. He was continually watching and getting to know people of allsorts, and among them peasants, whom he regarded as good and interestingpeople, and he was continually observing new points in them, alteringhis former views of them and forming new ones. With Sergey Ivanovitch itwas quite the contrary. Just as he liked and praised a country life incomparison with the life he did not like, so too he liked the peasantryin contradistinction to the class of men he did not like, and so too heknew the peasantry as something distinct from and opposed to mengenerally. In his methodical brain there were distinctly formulatedcertain aspects of peasant life, deduced partly from that life itself,but chiefly from contrast with other modes of life. He never changed hisopinion of the peasantry and his sympathetic attitude towards them.
In the discussions that arose between the brothers on their views of thepeasantry, Sergey Ivanovitch always got the better of his brother,precisely because Sergey Ivanovitch had definite ideas about thepeasant—his character, his qualities, and his tastes. Konstantin Levinhad no definite and unalterable idea on the subject, and so in theirarguments Konstantin was readily convicted of contradicting himself.
In Sergey Ivanovitch’s eyes his younger brother was a capital fellow,_with his heart in the right place_ (as he expressed it in French), butwith a mind which, though fairly quick, was too much influenced by theimpressions of the moment, and consequently filled with contradictions.With all the condescension of an elder brother he sometimes explained tohim the true import of things, but he derived little satisfaction fromarguing with him because he got the better of him too easily.
Konstantin Levin regarded his brother as a man of immense intellect andculture, as generous in the highest sense of the word, and possessed ofa special faculty for working for the public good. But in the depths ofhis heart, the older he became, and the more intimately he knew hisbrother, the more and more frequently the thought struck him that thisfaculty of working for the public good, of which he felt himself utterlydevoid, was possibly not so much a quality as a lack of something—not alack of good, honest, noble desires and tastes, but a lack of vitalforce, of what is called heart, of that impulse which drives a man tochoose someone out of the innumerable paths of life, and to care onlyfor that one. The better he knew his brother, the more he noticed thatSergey Ivanovitch, and many other people who worked for the publicwelfare, were not led by an impulse of the heart to care for the publicgood, but reasoned from intellectual considerations that it was a rightthing to take interest in public affairs, and consequently took interestin them. Levin was confirmed in this generalization by observing thathis brother did not take questions affecting the public welfare or thequestion of the immortality of the soul a bit more to heart than he didchess problems, or the ingenious construction of a new machine.
Besides this, Konstantin Levin was not at his ease with his brother,because in summer in the country Levin was continually busy with work onthe land, and the long summer day was not long enough for him to getthrough all he had to do, while Sergey Ivanovitch was taking a holiday.But though he was taking a holiday now, that is to say, he was doing nowriting, he was so used to intellectual activity that he liked to putinto concise and eloquent shape the ideas that occurred to him, andliked to have someone to listen to him. His most usual and naturallistener was his brother. And so in spite of the friendliness anddirectness of their relations, Konstantin felt an awkwardness in leavinghim alone. Sergey Ivanovitch liked to stretch himself on the grass inthe sun, and to lie so, basking and chatting lazily.
"You wouldn’t believe," he would say to his brother, "what a pleasurethis rural laziness is to me. Not an idea in one’s brain, as empty as adrum!"
But Konstantin Levin found it dull sitting and listening to him,especially when he knew that while he was away they would be cartingdung onto the fields not ploughed ready for it, and heaping it all upanyhow; and would not screw the shares in the ploughs, but would letthem come off and then say that the new ploughs were a silly invention,and there was nothing like the old Andreevna plough, and so on.
"Come, you’ve done enough trudging about in the heat," Sergey Ivanovitchwould say to him.
"No, I must just run round to the counting-house for a minute," Levinwould answer, and he would run off to the fields.


Chapter 2

Early in June it happened that Agafea Mihalovna, the old nurse andhousekeeper, in carrying to the cellar a jar of mushrooms she had justpickled, slipped, fell, and sprained her wrist. The district doctor, atalkative young medical student, who had just finished his studies, cameto see her. He examined the wrist, said it was not broken, was delightedat a chance of talking to the celebrated Sergey Ivanovitch Koznishev,and to show his advanced views of things told him all the scandal of thedistrict, complaining of the poor state into which the district councilhad fallen. Sergey Ivanovitch listened attentively, asked him questions,and, roused by a new listener, he talked fluently, uttered a few keenand weighty observations, respectfully appreciated by the young doctor,and was soon in that eager frame of mind his brother knew so well, whichalways, with him, followed a brilliant and eager conversation. After thedeparture of the doctor, he wanted to go with a fishing rod to theriver. Sergey Ivanovitch was fond of angling, and was, it seemed, proudof being able to care for such a stupid occupation.
Konstantin Levin, whose presence was needed in the plough land andmeadows, had come to take his brother in the trap.
It was that time of the year, the turning-point of summer, when thecrops of the present year are a certainty, when one begins to think ofthe sowing for next year, and the mowing is at hand; when the rye is allin ear, though its ears are still light, not yet full, and it waves ingray-green billows in the wind; when the green oats, with tufts ofyellow grass scattered here and there among it, droop irregularly overthe late-sown fields; when the early buckwheat is already out and hidingthe ground; when the fallow lands, trodden hard as stone by the cattle,are half ploughed over, with paths left untouched by the plough; whenfrom the dry dung-heaps carted onto the fields there comes at sunset asmell of manure mixed with meadow-sweet, and on the low-lying lands theriverside meadows are a thick sea of grass waiting for the mowing, withblackened heaps of the stalks of sorrel among it.
It was the time when there comes a brief pause in the toil of the fieldsbefore the beginning of the labors of harvest—every year recurring,every year straining every nerve of the peasants. The crop was asplendid one, and bright, hot summer days had set in with short, dewynights.
The brothers had to drive through the woods to reach the meadows. SergeyIvanovitch was all the while admiring the beauty of the woods, whichwere a tangled mass of leaves, pointing out to his brother now an oldlime tree on the point of flowering, dark on the shady side, andbrightly spotted with yellow stipules, now the young shoots of thisyear’s saplings brilliant with emerald. Konstantin Levin did not liketalking and hearing about the beauty of nature. Words for him took awaythe beauty of what he saw. He assented to what his brother said, but hecould not help beginning to think of other things. When they came out ofthe woods, all his attention was engrossed by the view of the fallowland on the upland, in parts yellow with grass, in parts trampled andcheckered with furrows, in parts dotted with ridges of dung, and inparts even ploughed. A string of carts was moving across it. Levincounted the carts, and was pleased that all that were wanted had beenbrought, and at the sight of the meadows his thoughts passed to themowing. He always felt something special moving him to the quick at thehay-making. On reaching the meadow Levin stopped the horse.
The morning dew was still lying on the thick undergrowth of the grass,and that he might not get his feet wet, Sergey Ivanovitch asked hisbrother to drive him in the trap up to the willow tree from which thecarp was caught. Sorry as Konstantin Levin was to crush down his mowinggrass, he drove him into the meadow. The high grass softly turned aboutthe wheels and the horse’s legs, leaving its seeds clinging to the wetaxles and spokes of the wheels. His brother seated himself under a bush,arranging his tackle, while Levin led the horse away, fastened him up,and walked into the vast gray-green sea of grass unstirred by the wind.The silky grass with its ripe seeds came almost to his waist in thedampest spots.
Crossing the meadow, Konstantin Levin came out onto the road, and met anold man with a swollen eye, carrying a skep on his shoulder.
"What? taken a stray swarm, Fomitch?" he asked.
"No, indeed, Konstantin Dmitrich! All we can do to keep our own! This isthe second swarm that has flown away.... Luckily the lads caught them.They were ploughing your field. They unyoked the horses and gallopedafter them."
"Well, what do you say, Fomitch—start mowing or wait a bit?"
"Eh, well. Our way’s to wait till St. Peter’s Day. But you always mowsooner. Well, to be sure, please God, the hay’s good. There’ll be plentyfor the beasts."
"What do you think about the weather?"
"That’s in God’s hands. Maybe it will be fine."
Levin went up to his brother.
Sergey Ivanovitch had caught nothing, but he was not bored, and seemedin the most cheerful frame of mind. Levin saw that, stimulated by hisconversation with the doctor, he wanted to talk. Levin, on the otherhand, would have liked to get home as soon as possible to give ordersabout getting together the mowers for next day, and to set at rest hisdoubts about the mowing, which greatly absorbed him.
"Well, let’s be going," he said.
"Why be in such a hurry? Let’s stay a little. But how wet you are! Eventhough one catches nothing, it’s nice. That’s the best thing about everypart of sport, that one has to do with nature. How exquisite this steelywater is!" said Sergey Ivanovitch. "These riverside banks always remindme of the riddle—do you know it? ‘The grass says to the water: we quiverand we quiver.’"
"I don’t know the riddle," answered Levin wearily.


Chapter 3

"Do you know, I’ve been thinking about you," said Sergey Ivanovitch."It’s beyond everything what’s being done in the district, according towhat this doctor tells me. He’s a very intelligent fellow. And as I’vetold you before, I tell you again: it’s not right for you not to go tothe meetings, and altogether to keep out of the district business. Ifdecent people won’t go into it, of course it’s bound to go all wrong. Wepay the money, and it all goes in salaries, and there are no schools,nor district nurses, nor midwives, nor drugstores—nothing."
"Well, I did try, you know," Levin said slowly and unwillingly. "Ican’t! and so there’s no help for it."
"But why can’t you? I must own I can’t make it out. Indifference,incapacity—I won’t admit; surely it’s not simply laziness?"
"None of those things. I’ve tried, and I see I can do nothing," saidLevin.
He had hardly grasped what his brother was saying. Looking towards theplough land across the river, he made out something black, but he couldnot distinguish whether it was a horse or the bailiff on horseback.
"Why is it you can do nothing? You made an attempt and didn’t succeed,as you think, and you give in. How can you have so little self-respect?"
"Self-respect!" said Levin, stung to the quick by his brother’s words;"I don’t understand. If they’d told me at college that other peopleunderstood the integral calculus, and I didn’t, then pride would havecome in. But in this case one wants first to be convinced that one hascertain qualifications for this sort of business, and especially thatall this business is of great importance."
"What! do you mean to say it’s not of importance?" said SergeyIvanovitch, stung to the quick too at his brother’s considering anythingof no importance that interested him, and still more at his obviouslypaying little attention to what he was saying.
"I don’t think it important; it does not take hold of me, I can’t helpit," answered Levin, making out that what he saw was the bailiff, andthat the bailiff seemed to be letting the peasants go off the ploughedland. They were turning the plough over. "Can they have finishedploughing?" he wondered.
"Come, really though," said the elder brother, with a frown on hishandsome, clever face, "there’s a limit to everything. It’s very well tobe original and genuine, and to dislike everything conventional—I knowall about that; but really, what you’re saying either has no meaning, orit has a very wrong meaning. How can you think it a matter of noimportance whether the peasant, whom you love as you assert..."
"I never did assert it," thought Konstantin Levin.
"... dies without help? The ignorant peasant-women starve the children,and the people stagnate in darkness, and are helpless in the hands ofevery village clerk, while you have at your disposal a means of helpingthem, and don’t help them because to your mind it’s of no importance."
And Sergey Ivanovitch put before him the alternative: either you are soundeveloped that you can’t see all that you can do, or you won’tsacrifice your ease, your vanity, or whatever it is, to do it.
Konstantin Levin felt that there was no course open to him but tosubmit, or to confess to a lack of zeal for the public good. And thismortified him and hurt his feelings.
"It’s both," he said resolutely: "I don’t see that it was possible..."
"What! was it impossible, if the money were properly laid out, toprovide medical aid?"
"Impossible, as it seems to me.... For the three thousand square milesof our district, what with our thaws, and the storms, and the work inthe fields, I don’t see how it is possible to provide medical aid allover. And besides, I don’t believe in medicine."
"Oh, well, that’s unfair ... I can quote to you thousands ofinstances.... But the schools, anyway."
"Why have schools?"
"What do you mean? Can there be two opinions of the advantage ofeducation? If it’s a good thing for you, it’s a good thing foreveryone."
Konstantin Levin felt himself morally pinned against a wall, and so hegot hot, and unconsciously blurted out the chief cause of hisindifference to public business.
"Perhaps it may all be very good; but why should I worry myself aboutestablishing dispensaries which I shall never make use of, and schoolsto which I shall never send my children, to which even the peasantsdon’t want to send their children, and to which I’ve no very firm faiththat they ought to send them?" said he.
Sergey Ivanovitch was for a minute surprised at this unexpected view ofthe subject; but he promptly made a new plan of attack. He was silentfor a little, drew out a hook, threw it in again, and turned to hisbrother smiling.
"Come, now.... In the first place, the dispensary is needed. Weourselves sent for the district doctor for Agafea Mihalovna."
"Oh, well, but I fancy her wrist will never be straight again."
"That remains to be proved.... Next, the peasant who can read and writeis as a workman of more use and value to you."
"No, you can ask anyone you like," Konstantin Levin answered withdecision, "the man that can read and write is much inferior as aworkman. And mending the highroads is an impossibility; and as soon asthey put up bridges they’re stolen."
"Still, that’s not the point," said Sergey Ivanovitch, frowning. Hedisliked contradiction, and still more, arguments that were continuallyskipping from one thing to another, introducing new and disconnectedpoints, so that there was no knowing to which to reply. "Do you admitthat education is a benefit for the people?"
"Yes, I admit it," said Levin without thinking, and he was consciousimmediately that he had said what he did not think. He felt that if headmitted that, it would be proved that he had been talking meaninglessrubbish. How it would be proved he could not tell, but he knew that thiswould inevitably be logically proved to him, and he awaited the proofs.
The argument turned out to be far simpler than he had expected.
"If you admit that it is a benefit," said Sergey Ivanovitch, "then, asan honest man, you cannot help caring about it and sympathizing with themovement, and so wishing to work for it."
"But I still do not admit this movement to be just," said KonstantinLevin, reddening a little.
"What! But you said just now..."
"That’s to say, I don’t admit it’s being either good or possible."
"That you can’t tell without making the trial."
"Well, supposing that’s so," said Levin, though he did not suppose so atall, "supposing that is so, still I don’t see, all the same, what I’m toworry myself about it for."
"How so?"
"No; since we are talking, explain it to me from the philosophical pointof view," said Levin.
"I can’t see where philosophy comes in," said Sergey Ivanovitch, in atone, Levin fancied, as though he did not admit his brother’s right totalk about philosophy. And that irritated Levin.
"I’ll tell you, then," he said with heat, "I imagine the mainspring ofall our actions is, after all, self-interest. Now in the localinstitutions I, as a nobleman, see nothing that could conduce to myprosperity, and the roads are not better and could not be better; myhorses carry me well enough over bad ones. Doctors and dispensaries areno use to me. An arbitrator of disputes is no use to me. I never appealto him, and never shall appeal to him. The schools are no good to me,but positively harmful, as I told you. For me the district institutionssimply mean the liability to pay fourpence halfpenny for every threeacres, to drive into the town, sleep with bugs, and listen to all sortsof idiocy and loathsomeness, and self-interest offers me no inducement."
"Excuse me," Sergey Ivanovitch interposed with a smile, "self-interestdid not induce us to work for the emancipation of the serfs, but we didwork for it."
"No!" Konstantin Levin broke in with still greater heat; "theemancipation of the serfs was a different matter. There self-interestdid come in. One longed to throw off that yoke that crushed us, alldecent people among us. But to be a town councilor and discuss how manydustmen are needed, and how chimneys shall be constructed in the town inwhich I don’t live—to serve on a jury and try a peasant who’s stolen aflitch of bacon, and listen for six hours at a stretch to all sorts ofjabber from the counsel for the defense and the prosecution, and thepresident cross-examining my old half-witted Alioshka, ‘Do you admit,prisoner in the dock, the fact of the removal of the bacon?’ ‘Eh?’"
Konstantin Levin had warmed to his subject, and began mimicking thepresident and the half-witted Alioshka: it seemed to him that it was allto the point.
But Sergey Ivanovitch shrugged his shoulders.
"Well, what do you mean to say, then?"
"I simply mean to say that those rights that touch me ... my interest, Ishall always defend to the best of my ability; that when they made raidson us students, and the police read our letters, I was ready to defendthose rights to the utmost, to defend my rights to education andfreedom. I can understand compulsory military service, which affects mychildren, my brothers, and myself, I am ready to deliberate on whatconcerns me; but deliberating on how to spend forty thousand roubles ofdistrict council money, or judging the half-witted Alioshka—I don’tunderstand, and I can’t do it."
Konstantin Levin spoke as though the floodgates of his speech had burstopen. Sergey Ivanovitch smiled.
"But tomorrow it’ll be your turn to be tried; would it have suited yourtastes better to be tried in the old criminal tribunal?"
"I’m not going to be tried. I shan’t murder anybody, and I’ve no need ofit. Well, I tell you what," he went on, flying off again to a subjectquite beside the point, "our district self-government and all the restof it—it’s just like the birch branches we stick in the ground onTrinity Day, for instance, to look like a copse which has grown up ofitself in Europe, and I can’t gush over these birch branches and believein them."
Sergey Ivanovitch merely shrugged his shoulders, as though to expresshis wonder how the birch branches had come into their argument at thatpoint, though he did really understand at once what his brother meant.
"Excuse me, but you know one really can’t argue in that way," heobserved.
But Konstantin Levin wanted to justify himself for the failing, of whichhe was conscious, of lack of zeal for the public welfare, and he wenton.
"I imagine," he said, "that no sort of activity is likely to be lastingif it is not founded on self-interest, that’s a universal principle, aphilosophical principle," he said, repeating the word "philosophical"with determination, as though wishing to show that he had as much rightas any one else to talk of philosophy.
Sergey Ivanovitch smiled. "He too has a philosophy of his own at theservice of his natural tendencies," he thought.
"Come, you’d better let philosophy alone," he said. "The chief problemof the philosophy of all ages consists just in finding the indispensableconnection which exists between individual and social interests. Butthat’s not to the point; what is to the point is a correction I mustmake in your comparison. The birches are not simply stuck in, but someare sown and some are planted, and one must deal carefully with them.It’s only those peoples that have an intuitive sense of what’s ofimportance and significance in their institutions, and know how to valuethem, that have a future before them—it’s only those peoples that onecan truly call historical."
And Sergey Ivanovitch carried the subject into the regions ofphilosophical history where Konstantin Levin could not follow him, andshowed him all the incorrectness of his view.
"As for your dislike of it, excuse my saying so, that’s simply ourRussian sloth and old serf-owner’s ways, and I’m convinced that in youit’s a temporary error and will pass."
Konstantin was silent. He felt himself vanquished on all sides, but hefelt at the same time that what he wanted to say was unintelligible tohis brother. Only he could not make up his mind whether it wasunintelligible because he was not capable of expressing his meaningclearly, or because his brother would not or could not understand him.But he did not pursue the speculation, and without replying, he fell tomusing on a quite different and personal matter.
Sergey Ivanovitch wound up the last line, untied the horse, and theydrove off.


Chapter 4

The personal matter that absorbed Levin during his conversation with hisbrother was this. Once in a previous year he had gone to look at themowing, and being made very angry by the bailiff he had recourse to hisfavorite means for regaining his temper,—he took a scythe from a peasantand began mowing.
He liked the work so much that he had several times tried his hand atmowing since. He had cut the whole of the meadow in front of his house,and this year ever since the early spring he had cherished a plan formowing for whole days together with the peasants. Ever since hisbrother’s arrival, he had been in doubt whether to mow or not. He wasloath to leave his brother alone all day long, and he was afraid hisbrother would laugh at him about it. But as he drove into the meadow,and recalled the sensations of mowing, he came near deciding that hewould go mowing. After the irritating discussion with his brother, hepondered over this intention again.
"I must have physical exercise, or my temper’ll certainly be ruined," hethought, and he determined he would go mowing, however awkward he mightfeel about it with his brother or the peasants.
Towards evening Konstantin Levin went to his counting house, gavedirections as to the work to be done, and sent about the village tosummon the mowers for the morrow, to cut the hay in Kalinov meadow, thelargest and best of his grass lands.
"And send my scythe, please, to Tit, for him to set it, and bring itround tomorrow. I shall maybe do some mowing myself too," he said,trying not to be embarrassed.
The bailiff smiled and said: "Yes, sir."
At tea the same evening Levin said to his brother:
"I fancy the fine weather will last. Tomorrow I shall start mowing."
"I’m so fond of that form of field labor," said Sergey Ivanovitch.
"I’m awfully fond of it. I sometimes mow myself with the peasants, andtomorrow I want to try mowing the whole day."
Sergey Ivanovitch lifted his head, and looked with interest at hisbrother.
"How do you mean? Just like one of the peasants, all day long?"
"Yes, it’s very pleasant," said Levin.
"It’s splendid as exercise, only you’ll hardly be able to stand it,"said Sergey Ivanovitch, without a shade of irony.
"I’ve tried it. It’s hard work at first, but you get into it. I dare sayI shall manage to keep it up..."
"Really! what an idea! But tell me, how do the peasants look at it? Isuppose they laugh in their sleeves at their master’s being such a queerfish?"
"No, I don’t think so; but it’s so delightful, and at the same time suchhard work, that one has no time to think about it."
"But how will you do about dining with them? To send you a bottle ofLafitte and roast turkey out there would be a little awkward."
"No, I’ll simply come home at the time of their noonday rest."
Next morning Konstantin Levin got up earlier than usual, but he wasdetained giving directions on the farm, and when he reached the mowinggrass the mowers were already at their second row.
From the uplands he could get a view of the shaded cut part of themeadow below, with its grayish ridges of cut grass, and the black heapsof coats, taken off by the mowers at the place from which they hadstarted cutting.
Gradually, as he rode towards the meadow, the peasants came into sight,some in coats, some in their shirts mowing, one behind another in a longstring, swinging their scythes differently. He counted forty-two ofthem.
They were mowing slowly over the uneven, low-lying parts of the meadow,where there had been an old dam. Levin recognized some of his own men.Here was old Yermil in a very long white smock, bending forward to swinga scythe; there was a young fellow, Vaska, who had been a coachman ofLevin’s, taking every row with a wide sweep. Here, too, was Tit, Levin’spreceptor in the art of mowing, a thin little peasant. He was in frontof all, and cut his wide row without bending, as though playing with thescythe.
Levin got off his mare, and fastening her up by the roadside went tomeet Tit, who took a second scythe out of a bush and gave it to him.
"It’s ready, sir; it’s like a razor, cuts of itself," said Tit, takingoff his cap with a smile and giving him the scythe.
Levin took the scythe, and began trying it. As they finished their rows,the mowers, hot and good-humored, came out into the road one afteranother, and, laughing a little, greeted the master. They all stared athim, but no one made any remark, till a tall old man, with a wrinkled,beardless face, wearing a short sheepskin jacket, came out into the roadand accosted him.
"Look’ee now, master, once take hold of the rope there’s no letting itgo!" he said, and Levin heard smothered laughter among the mowers.
"I’ll try not to let it go," he said, taking his stand behind Tit, andwaiting for the time to begin.
"Mind’ee," repeated the old man.
Tit made room, and Levin started behind him. The grass was short closeto the road, and Levin, who had not done any mowing for a long while,and was disconcerted by the eyes fastened upon him, cut badly for thefirst moments, though he swung his scythe vigorously. Behind him heheard voices:
"It’s not set right; handle’s too high; see how he has to stoop to it,"said one.
"Press more on the heel," said another.
"Never mind, he’ll get on all right," the old man resumed.
"He’s made a start.... You swing it too wide, you’ll tire yourselfout.... The master, sure, does his best for himself! But see the grassmissed out! For such work us fellows would catch it!"
The grass became softer, and Levin, listening without answering,followed Tit, trying to do the best he could. They moved a hundredpaces. Tit kept moving on, without stopping, not showing the slightestweariness, but Levin was already beginning to be afraid he would not beable to keep it up: he was so tired.
He felt as he swung his scythe that he was at the very end of hisstrength, and was making up his mind to ask Tit to stop. But at thatvery moment Tit stopped of his own accord, and stooping down picked upsome grass, rubbed his scythe, and began whetting it. Levin straightenedhimself, and drawing a deep breath looked round. Behind him came apeasant, and he too was evidently tired, for he stopped at once withoutwaiting to mow up to Levin, and began whetting his scythe. Tit sharpenedhis scythe and Levin’s, and they went on. The next time it was just thesame. Tit moved on with sweep after sweep of his scythe, not stoppingnor showing signs of weariness. Levin followed him, trying not to getleft behind, and he found it harder and harder: the moment came when hefelt he had no strength left, but at that very moment Tit stopped andwhetted the scythes.
So they mowed the first row. And this long row seemed particularly hardwork to Levin; but when the end was reached and Tit, shouldering hisscythe, began with deliberate stride returning on the tracks left by hisheels in the cut grass, and Levin walked back in the same way over thespace he had cut, in spite of the sweat that ran in streams over hisface and fell in drops down his nose, and drenched his back as though hehad been soaked in water, he felt very happy. What delighted himparticularly was that now he knew he would be able to hold out.
His pleasure was only disturbed by his row not being well cut. "I willswing less with my arm and more with my whole body," he thought,comparing Tit’s row, which looked as if it had been cut with a line,with his own unevenly and irregularly lying grass.
The first row, as Levin noticed, Tit had mowed specially quickly,probably wishing to put his master to the test, and the row happened tobe a long one. The next rows were easier, but still Levin had to strainevery nerve not to drop behind the peasants.
He thought of nothing, wished for nothing, but not to be left behind thepeasants, and to do his work as well as possible. He heard nothing butthe swish of scythes, and saw before him Tit’s upright figure mowingaway, the crescent-shaped curve of the cut grass, the grass and flowerheads slowly and rhythmically falling before the blade of his scythe,and ahead of him the end of the row, where would come the rest.
Suddenly, in the midst of his toil, without understanding what it was orwhence it came, he felt a pleasant sensation of chill on his hot, moistshoulders. He glanced at the sky in the interval for whetting thescythes. A heavy, lowering storm cloud had blown up, and big raindropswere falling. Some of the peasants went to their coats and put them on;others—just like Levin himself—merely shrugged their shoulders, enjoyingthe pleasant coolness of it.
Another row, and yet another row, followed—long rows and short rows,with good grass and with poor grass. Levin lost all sense of time, andcould not have told whether it was late or early now. A change began tocome over his work, which gave him immense satisfaction. In the midst ofhis toil there were moments during which he forgot what he was doing,and it came all easy to him, and at those same moments his row wasalmost as smooth and well cut as Tit’s. But so soon as he recollectedwhat he was doing, and began trying to do better, he was at onceconscious of all the difficulty of his task, and the row was badly mown.
On finishing yet another row he would have gone back to the top of themeadow again to begin the next, but Tit stopped, and going up to the oldman said something in a low voice to him. They both looked at the sun."What are they talking about, and why doesn’t he go back?" thoughtLevin, not guessing that the peasants had been mowing no less than fourhours without stopping, and it was time for their lunch.
"Lunch, sir," said the old man.
"Is it really time? That’s right; lunch, then."
Levin gave his scythe to Tit, and together with the peasants, who werecrossing the long stretch of mown grass, slightly sprinkled with rain,to get their bread from the heap of coats, he went towards his house.Only then he suddenly awoke to the fact that he had been wrong about theweather and the rain was drenching his hay.
"The hay will be spoiled," he said.
"Not a bit of it, sir; mow in the rain, and you’ll rake in fineweather!" said the old man.
Levin untied his horse and rode home to his coffee. Sergey Ivanovitchwas only just getting up. When he had drunk his coffee, Levin rode backagain to the mowing before Sergey Ivanovitch had had time to dress andcome down to the dining room.


Chapter 5

After lunch Levin was not in the same place in the string of mowers asbefore, but stood between the old man who had accosted him jocosely, andnow invited him to be his neighbor, and a young peasant, who had onlybeen married in the autumn, and who was mowing this summer for the firsttime.
The old man, holding himself erect, moved in front, with his feet turnedout, taking long, regular strides, and with a precise and regular actionwhich seemed to cost him no more effort than swinging one’s arms inwalking, as though it were in play, he laid down the high, even row ofgrass. It was as though it were not he but the sharp scythe of itselfswishing through the juicy grass.
Behind Levin came the lad Mishka. His pretty, boyish face, with a twistof fresh grass bound round his hair, was all working with effort; butwhenever anyone looked at him he smiled. He would clearly have diedsooner than own it was hard work for him.
Levin kept between them. In the very heat of the day the mowing did notseem such hard work to him. The perspiration with which he was drenchedcooled him, while the sun, that burned his back, his head, and his arms,bare to the elbow, gave a vigor and dogged energy to his labor; and moreand more often now came those moments of unconsciousness, when it waspossible not to think what one was doing. The scythe cut of itself.These were happy moments. Still more delightful were the moments whenthey reached the stream where the rows ended, and the old man rubbed hisscythe with the wet, thick grass, rinsed its blade in the fresh water ofthe stream, ladled out a little in a tin dipper, and offered Levin adrink.
"What do you say to my home-brew, eh? Good, eh?" said he, winking.
And truly Levin had never drunk any liquor so good as this warm waterwith green bits floating in it, and a taste of rust from the tin dipper.And immediately after this came the delicious, slow saunter, with hishand on the scythe, during which he could wipe away the streaming sweat,take deep breaths of air, and look about at the long string of mowersand at what was happening around in the forest and the country.
The longer Levin mowed, the oftener he felt the moments ofunconsciousness in which it seemed not his hands that swung the scythe,but the scythe mowing of itself, a body full of life and consciousnessof its own, and as though by magic, without thinking of it, the workturned out regular and well-finished of itself. These were the mostblissful moments.
It was only hard work when he had to break off the motion, which hadbecome unconscious, and to think; when he had to mow round a hillock ora tuft of sorrel. The old man did this easily. When a hillock came hechanged his action, and at one time with the heel, and at another withthe tip of his scythe, clipped the hillock round both sides with shortstrokes. And while he did this he kept looking about and watching whatcame into his view: at one moment he picked a wild berry and ate it oroffered it to Levin, then he flung away a twig with the blade of thescythe, then he looked at a quail’s nest, from which the bird flew justunder the scythe, or caught a snake that crossed his path, and liftingit on the scythe as though on a fork showed it to Levin and threw itaway.
For both Levin and the young peasant behind him, such changes ofposition were difficult. Both of them, repeating over and over again thesame strained movement, were in a perfect frenzy of toil, and wereincapable of shifting their position and at the same time watching whatwas before them.
Levin did not notice how time was passing. If he had been asked how longhe had been working he would have said half an hour—and it was gettingon for dinner time. As they were walking back over the cut grass, theold man called Levin’s attention to the little girls and boys who werecoming from different directions, hardly visible through the long grass,and along the road towards the mowers, carrying sacks of bread draggingat their little hands and pitchers of the sour rye-beer, with clothswrapped round them.
"Look’ee, the little emmets crawling!" he said, pointing to them, and heshaded his eyes with his hand to look at the sun. They mowed two morerows; the old man stopped.
"Come, master, dinner time!" he said briskly. And on reaching the streamthe mowers moved off across the lines of cut grass towards their pile ofcoats, where the children who had brought their dinners were sittingwaiting for them. The peasants gathered into groups—those further awayunder a cart, those nearer under a willow bush.
Levin sat down by them; he felt disinclined to go away.
All constraint with the master had disappeared long ago. The peasantsgot ready for dinner. Some washed, the young lads bathed in the stream,others made a place comfortable for a rest, untied their sacks of bread,and uncovered the pitchers of rye-beer. The old man crumbled up somebread in a cup, stirred it with the handle of a spoon, poured water onit from the dipper, broke up some more bread, and having seasoned itwith salt, he turned to the east to say his prayer.
"Come, master, taste my sop," said he, kneeling down before the cup.
The sop was so good that Levin gave up the idea of going home. He dinedwith the old man, and talked to him about his family affairs, taking thekeenest interest in them, and told him about his own affairs and all thecircumstances that could be of interest to the old man. He felt muchnearer to him than to his brother, and could not help smiling at theaffection he felt for this man. When the old man got up again, said hisprayer, and lay down under a bush, putting some grass under his head fora pillow, Levin did the same, and in spite of the clinging flies thatwere so persistent in the sunshine, and the midges that tickled his hotface and body, he fell asleep at once and only waked when the sun hadpassed to the other side of the bush and reached him. The old man hadbeen awake a long while, and was sitting up whetting the scythes of theyounger lads.
Levin looked about him and hardly recognized the place, everything wasso changed. The immense stretch of meadow had been mown and wassparkling with a peculiar fresh brilliance, with its lines of alreadysweet-smelling grass in the slanting rays of the evening sun. And thebushes about the river had been cut down, and the river itself, notvisible before, now gleaming like steel in its bends, and the moving,ascending, peasants, and the sharp wall of grass of the unmown part ofthe meadow, and the hawks hovering over the stripped meadow—all wasperfectly new. Raising himself, Levin began considering how much hadbeen cut and how much more could still be done that day.
The work done was exceptionally much for forty-two men. They had cut thewhole of the big meadow, which had, in the years of serf labor, takenthirty scythes two days to mow. Only the corners remained to do, wherethe rows were short. But Levin felt a longing to get as much mowing donethat day as possible, and was vexed with the sun sinking so quickly inthe sky. He felt no weariness; all he wanted was to get his work donemore and more quickly and as much done as possible.
"Could you cut Mashkin Upland too?—what do you think?" he said to theold man.
"As God wills, the sun’s not high. A little vodka for the lads?"
At the afternoon rest, when they were sitting down again, and those whosmoked had lighted their pipes, the old man told the men that "MashkinUpland’s to be cut—there’ll be some vodka."
"Why not cut it? Come on, Tit! We’ll look sharp! We can eat at night.Come on!" cried voices, and eating up their bread, the mowers went backto work.
"Come, lads, keep it up!" said Tit, and ran on ahead almost at a trot.
"Get along, get along!" said the old man, hurrying after him and easilyovertaking him, "I’ll mow you down, look out!"
And young and old mowed away, as though they were racing with oneanother. But however fast they worked, they did not spoil the grass, andthe rows were laid just as neatly and exactly. The little piece leftuncut in the corner was mown in five minutes. The last of the mowerswere just ending their rows while the foremost snatched up their coatsonto their shoulders, and crossed the road towards Mashkin Upland.
The sun was already sinking into the trees when they went with theirjingling dippers into the wooded ravine of Mashkin Upland. The grass wasup to their waists in the middle of the hollow, soft, tender, andfeathery, spotted here and there among the trees with wild heart’s-ease.
After a brief consultation—whether to take the rows lengthwise ordiagonally—Prohor Yermilin, also a renowned mower, a huge, black-hairedpeasant, went on ahead. He went up to the top, turned back again andstarted mowing, and they all proceeded to form in line behind him, goingdownhill through the hollow and uphill right up to the edge of theforest. The sun sank behind the forest. The dew was falling by now; themowers were in the sun only on the hillside, but below, where a mist wasrising, and on the opposite side, they mowed into the fresh, dewy shade.The work went rapidly. The grass cut with a juicy sound, and was at oncelaid in high, fragrant rows. The mowers from all sides, brought closertogether in the short row, kept urging one another on to the sound ofjingling dippers and clanging scythes, and the hiss of the whetstonessharpening them, and good-humored shouts.
Levin still kept between the young peasant and the old man. The old man,who had put on his short sheepskin jacket, was just as good-humored,jocose, and free in his movements. Among the trees they were continuallycutting with their scythes the so-called "birch mushrooms," swollen fatin the succulent grass. But the old man bent down every time he cameacross a mushroom, picked it up and put it in his bosom. "Anotherpresent for my old woman," he said as he did so.
Easy as it was to mow the wet, soft grass, it was hard work going up anddown the steep sides of the ravine. But this did not trouble the oldman. Swinging his scythe just as ever, and moving his feet in their big,plaited shoes with firm, little steps, he climbed slowly up the steepplace, and though his breeches hanging out below his smock, and hiswhole frame trembled with effort, he did not miss one blade of grass orone mushroom on his way, and kept making jokes with the peasants andLevin. Levin walked after him and often thought he must fall, as heclimbed with a scythe up a steep cliff where it would have been hardwork to clamber without anything. But he climbed up and did what he hadto do. He felt as though some external force were moving him.


Chapter 6

Mashkin Upland was mown, the last row finished, the peasants had put ontheir coats and were gaily trudging home. Levin got on his horse and,parting regretfully from the peasants, rode homewards. On the hillsidehe looked back; he could not see them in the mist that had risen fromthe valley; he could only hear rough, good-humored voices, laughter, andthe sound of clanking scythes.
Sergey Ivanovitch had long ago finished dinner, and was drinking icedlemon and water in his own room, looking through the reviews and paperswhich he had only just received by post, when Levin rushed into theroom, talking merrily, with his wet and matted hair sticking to hisforehead, and his back and chest grimed and moist.
"We mowed the whole meadow! Oh, it is nice, delicious! And how have youbeen getting on?" said Levin, completely forgetting the disagreeableconversation of the previous day.
"Mercy! what do you look like!" said Sergey Ivanovitch, for the firstmoment looking round with some dissatisfaction. "And the door, do shutthe door!" he cried. "You must have let in a dozen at least."
Sergey Ivanovitch could not endure flies, and in his own room he neveropened the window except at night, and carefully kept the door shut.
"Not one, on my honor. But if I have, I’ll catch them. You wouldn’tbelieve what a pleasure it is! How have you spent the day?"
"Very well. But have you really been mowing the whole day? I expectyou’re as hungry as a wolf. Kouzma has got everything ready for you."
"No, I don’t feel hungry even. I had something to eat there. But I’ll goand wash."
"Yes, go along, go along, and I’ll come to you directly," said SergeyIvanovitch, shaking his head as he looked at his brother. "Go along,make haste," he added smiling, and gathering up his books, he preparedto go too. He, too, felt suddenly good-humored and disinclined to leavehis brother’s side. "But what did you do while it was raining?"
"Rain? Why, there was scarcely a drop. I’ll come directly. So you had anice day too? That’s first-rate." And Levin went off to change hisclothes.
Five minutes later the brothers met in the dining room. Although itseemed to Levin that he was not hungry, and he sat down to dinner simplyso as not to hurt Kouzma’s feelings, yet when he began to eat the dinnerstruck him as extraordinarily good. Sergey Ivanovitch watched him with asmile.
"Oh, by the way, there’s a letter for you," said he. "Kouzma, bring itdown, please. And mind you shut the doors."
The letter was from Oblonsky. Levin read it aloud. Oblonsky wrote to himfrom Petersburg: "I have had a letter from Dolly; she’s at Ergushovo,and everything seems going wrong there. Do ride over and see her,please; help her with advice; you know all about it. She will be so gladto see you. She’s quite alone, poor thing. My mother-in-law and all ofthem are still abroad."
"That’s capital! I will certainly ride over to her," said Levin. "Orwe’ll go together. She’s such a splendid woman, isn’t she?"
"They’re not far from here, then?"
"Twenty-five miles. Or perhaps it is thirty. But a capital road.Capital, we’ll drive over."
"I shall be delighted," said Sergey Ivanovitch, still smiling. The sightof his younger brother’s appearance had immediately put him in a goodhumor.
"Well, you have an appetite!" he said, looking at his dark-red, sunburntface and neck bent over the plate.
"Splendid! You can’t imagine what an effectual remedy it is for everysort of foolishness. I want to enrich medicine with a new word:_Arbeitskur_."
"Well, but you don’t need it, I should fancy."
"No, but for all sorts of nervous invalids."
"Yes, it ought to be tried. I had meant to come to the mowing to look atyou, but it was so unbearably hot that I got no further than the forest.I sat there a little, and went on by the forest to the village, met yourold nurse, and sounded her as to the peasants’ view of you. As far as Ican make out, they don’t approve of this. She said: ‘It’s not agentleman’s work.’ Altogether, I fancy that in the people’s ideas thereare very clear and definite notions of certain, as they call it,‘gentlemanly’ lines of action. And they don’t sanction the gentry’smoving outside bounds clearly laid down in their ideas."
"Maybe so; but anyway it’s a pleasure such as I have never known in mylife. And there’s no harm in it, you know. Is there?" answered Levin. "Ican’t help it if they don’t like it. Though I do believe it’s all right.Eh?"
"Altogether," pursued Sergey Ivanovitch, "you’re satisfied with yourday?"
"Quite satisfied. We cut the whole meadow. And such a splendid old man Imade friends with there! You can’t fancy how delightful he was!"
"Well, so you’re content with your day. And so am I. First, I solved twochess problems, and one a very pretty one—a pawn opening. I’ll show ityou. And then—I thought over our conversation yesterday."
"Eh! our conversation yesterday?" said Levin, blissfully dropping hiseyelids and drawing deep breaths after finishing his dinner, andabsolutely incapable of recalling what their conversation yesterday wasabout.
"I think you are partly right. Our difference of opinion amounts tothis, that you make the mainspring self-interest, while I suppose thatinterest in the common weal is bound to exist in every man of a certaindegree of advancement. Possibly you are right too, that action foundedon material interest would be more desirable. You are altogether, as theFrench say, too _primesautière_ a nature; you must have intense,energetic action, or nothing."
Levin listened to his brother and did not understand a single word, anddid not want to understand. He was only afraid his brother might ask himsome question which would make it evident he had not heard.
"So that’s what I think it is, my dear boy," said Sergey Ivanovitch,touching him on the shoulder.
"Yes, of course. But, do you know? I won’t stand up for my view,"answered Levin, with a guilty, childlike smile. "Whatever was it I wasdisputing about?" he wondered. "Of course, I’m right, and he’s right,and it’s all first-rate. Only I must go round to the counting house andsee to things." He got up, stretching and smiling. Sergey Ivanovitchsmiled too.
"If you want to go out, let’s go together," he said, disinclined to beparted from his brother, who seemed positively breathing out freshnessand energy. "Come, we’ll go to the counting house, if you have to gothere."
"Oh, heavens!" shouted Levin, so loudly that Sergey Ivanovitch was quitefrightened.
"What, what is the matter?"
"How’s Agafea Mihalovna’s hand?" said Levin, slapping himself on thehead. "I’d positively forgotten her even."
"It’s much better."
"Well, anyway I’ll run down to her. Before you’ve time to get your haton, I’ll be back."
And he ran downstairs, clattering with his heels like a spring-rattle.


Chapter 7

Stephan Arkadyevitch had gone to Petersburg to perform the most naturaland essential official duty—so familiar to everyone in the governmentservice, though incomprehensible to outsiders—that duty, but for whichone could hardly be in government service, of reminding the ministry ofhis existence—and having, for the due performance of this rite, takenall the available cash from home, was gaily and agreeably spending hisdays at the races and in the summer villas. Meanwhile Dolly and thechildren had moved into the country, to cut down expenses as much aspossible. She had gone to Ergushovo, the estate that had been her dowry,and the one where in spring the forest had been sold. It was nearlyforty miles from Levin’s Pokrovskoe. The big, old house at Ergushovo hadbeen pulled down long ago, and the old prince had had the lodge done upand built on to. Twenty years before, when Dolly was a child, the lodgehad been roomy and comfortable, though, like all lodges, it stoodsideways to the entrance avenue, and faced the south. But by now thislodge was old and dilapidated. When Stepan Arkadyevitch had gone down inthe spring to sell the forest, Dolly had begged him to look over thehouse and order what repairs might be needed. Stepan Arkadyevitch, likeall unfaithful husbands indeed, was very solicitous for his wife’scomfort, and he had himself looked over the house, and giveninstructions about everything that he considered necessary. What heconsidered necessary was to cover all the furniture with cretonne, toput up curtains, to weed the garden, to make a little bridge on thepond, and to plant flowers. But he forgot many other essential matters,the want of which greatly distressed Darya Alexandrovna later on.
In spite of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s efforts to be an attentive father andhusband, he never could keep in his mind that he had a wife andchildren. He had bachelor tastes, and it was in accordance with themthat he shaped his life. On his return to Moscow he informed his wifewith pride that everything was ready, that the house would be a littleparadise, and that he advised her most certainly to go. His wife’sstaying away in the country was very agreeable to Stepan Arkadyevitchfrom every point of view: it did the children good, it decreasedexpenses, and it left him more at liberty. Darya Alexandrovna regardedstaying in the country for the summer as essential for the children,especially for the little girl, who had not succeeded in regaining herstrength after the scarlatina, and also as a means of escaping the pettyhumiliations, the little bills owing to the wood-merchant, thefishmonger, the shoemaker, which made her miserable. Besides this, shewas pleased to go away to the country because she was dreaming ofgetting her sister Kitty to stay with her there. Kitty was to be backfrom abroad in the middle of the summer, and bathing had been prescribedfor her. Kitty wrote that no prospect was so alluring as to spend thesummer with Dolly at Ergushovo, full of childish associations for bothof them.
The first days of her existence in the country were very hard for Dolly.She used to stay in the country as a child, and the impression she hadretained of it was that the country was a refuge from all theunpleasantness of the town, that life there, though not luxurious—Dollycould easily make up her mind to that—was cheap and comfortable; thatthere was plenty of everything, everything was cheap, everything couldbe got, and children were happy. But now coming to the country as thehead of a family, she perceived that it was all utterly unlike what shehad fancied.
The day after their arrival there was a heavy fall of rain, and in thenight the water came through in the corridor and in the nursery, so thatthe beds had to be carried into the drawing room. There was no kitchenmaid to be found; of the nine cows, it appeared from the words of thecowherd-woman that some were about to calve, others had just calved,others were old, and others again hard-uddered; there was not butter normilk enough even for the children. There were no eggs. They could get nofowls; old, purplish, stringy cocks were all they had for roasting andboiling. Impossible to get women to scrub the floors—all werepotato-hoeing. Driving was out of the question, because one of thehorses was restive, and bolted in the shafts. There was no place wherethey could bathe; the whole of the river-bank was trampled by the cattleand open to the road; even walks were impossible, for the cattle strayedinto the garden through a gap in the hedge, and there was one terriblebull, who bellowed, and therefore might be expected to gore somebody.There were no proper cupboards for their clothes; what cupboards therewere either would not close at all, or burst open whenever anyone passedby them. There were no pots and pans; there was no copper in thewashhouse, nor even an ironing-board in the maids’ room.
Finding instead of peace and rest all these, from her point of view,fearful calamities, Darya Alexandrovna was at first in despair. Sheexerted herself to the utmost, felt the hopelessness of the position,and was every instant suppressing the tears that started into her eyes.The bailiff, a retired quartermaster, whom Stepan Arkadyevitch had takena fancy to and had appointed bailiff on account of his handsome andrespectful appearance as a hall-porter, showed no sympathy for DaryaAlexandrovna’s woes. He said respectfully, "nothing can be done, thepeasants are such a wretched lot," and did nothing to help her.
The position seemed hopeless. But in the Oblonskys’ household, as in allfamilies indeed, there was one inconspicuous but most valuable anduseful person, Marya Philimonovna. She soothed her mistress, assured herthat everything would _come round_ (it was her expression, and Matveyhad borrowed it from her), and without fuss or hurry proceeded to set towork herself. She had immediately made friends with the bailiff’s wife,and on the very first day she drank tea with her and the bailiff underthe acacias, and reviewed all the circumstances of the position. Verysoon Marya Philimonovna had established her club, so to say, under theacacias, and there it was, in this club, consisting of the bailiff’swife, the village elder, and the counting house clerk, that thedifficulties of existence were gradually smoothed away, and in a week’stime everything actually had come round. The roof was mended, a kitchenmaid was found—a crony of the village elder’s—hens were bought, the cowsbegan giving milk, the garden hedge was stopped up with stakes, thecarpenter made a mangle, hooks were put in the cupboards, and theyceased to burst open spontaneously, and an ironing-board covered witharmy cloth was placed across from the arm of a chair to the chest ofdrawers, and there was a smell of flatirons in the maids’ room.
"Just see, now, and you were quite in despair," said Marya Philimonovna,pointing to the ironing-board. They even rigged up a bathing-shed ofstraw hurdles. Lily began to bathe, and Darya Alexandrovna began torealize, if only in part, her expectations, if not of a peaceful, atleast of a comfortable, life in the country. Peaceful with six childrenDarya Alexandrovna could not be. One would fall ill, another mighteasily become so, a third would be without something necessary, a fourthwould show symptoms of a bad disposition, and so on. Rare indeed werethe brief periods of peace. But these cares and anxieties were for DaryaAlexandrovna the sole happiness possible. Had it not been for them, shewould have been left alone to brood over her husband who did not loveher. And besides, hard though it was for the mother to bear the dread ofillness, the illnesses themselves, and the grief of seeing signs of evilpropensities in her children—the children themselves were even nowrepaying her in small joys for her sufferings. Those joys were so smallthat they passed unnoticed, like gold in sand, and at bad moments shecould see nothing but the pain, nothing but sand; but there were goodmoments too when she saw nothing but the joy, nothing but gold.
Now in the solitude of the country, she began to be more and morefrequently aware of those joys. Often, looking at them, she would makeevery possible effort to persuade herself that she was mistaken, thatshe as a mother was partial to her children. All the same, she could nothelp saying to herself that she had charming children, all six of themin different ways, but a set of children such as is not often to be metwith, and she was happy in them, and proud of them.


Chapter 8

Towards the end of May, when everything had been more or lesssatisfactorily arranged, she received her husband’s answer to hercomplaints of the disorganized state of things in the country. He wrotebegging her forgiveness for not having thought of everything before, andpromised to come down at the first chance. This chance did not presentitself, and till the beginning of June Darya Alexandrovna stayed alonein the country.
On the Sunday in St. Peter’s week Darya Alexandrovna drove to mass forall her children to take the sacrament. Darya Alexandrovna in herintimate, philosophical talks with her sister, her mother, and herfriends very often astonished them by the freedom of her views in regardto religion. She had a strange religion of transmigration of souls allher own, in which she had firm faith, troubling herself little about thedogmas of the Church. But in her family she was strict in carrying outall that was required by the Church—and not merely in order to set anexample, but with all her heart in it. The fact that the children hadnot been at the sacrament for nearly a year worried her extremely, andwith the full approval and sympathy of Marya Philimonovna she decidedthat this should take place now in the summer.
For several days before, Darya Alexandrovna was busily deliberating onhow to dress all the children. Frocks were made or altered and washed,seams and flounces were let out, buttons were sewn on, and ribbons gotready. One dress, Tanya’s, which the English governess had undertaken,cost Darya Alexandrovna much loss of temper. The English governess inaltering it had made the seams in the wrong place, had taken up thesleeves too much, and altogether spoilt the dress. It was so narrow onTanya’s shoulders that it was quite painful to look at her. But MaryaPhilimonovna had the happy thought of putting in gussets, and adding alittle shoulder-cape. The dress was set right, but there was nearly aquarrel with the English governess. On the morning, however, all washappily arranged, and towards ten o’clock—the time at which they hadasked the priest to wait for them for the mass—the children in their newdresses, with beaming faces, stood on the step before the carriagewaiting for their mother.
To the carriage, instead of the restive Raven, they had harnessed,thanks to the representations of Marya Philimonovna, the bailiff’shorse, Brownie, and Darya Alexandrovna, delayed by anxiety over her ownattire, came out and got in, dressed in a white muslin gown.
Darya Alexandrovna had done her hair, and dressed with care andexcitement. In the old days she had dressed for her own sake to lookpretty and be admired. Later on, as she got older, dress became more andmore distasteful to her. She saw that she was losing her good looks. Butnow she began to feel pleasure and interest in dress again. Now she didnot dress for her own sake, not for the sake of her own beauty, butsimply that as the mother of those exquisite creatures she might notspoil the general effect. And looking at herself for the last time inthe looking-glass she was satisfied with herself. She looked nice. Notnice as she would have wished to look nice in old days at a ball, butnice for the object which she now had in view.
In the church there was no one but the peasants, the servants and theirwomen-folk. But Darya Alexandrovna saw, or fancied she saw, thesensation produced by her children and her. The children were not onlybeautiful to look at in their smart little dresses, but they werecharming in the way they behaved. Aliosha, it is true, did not standquite correctly; he kept turning round, trying to look at his littlejacket from behind; but all the same he was wonderfully sweet. Tanyabehaved like a grownup person, and looked after the little ones. And thesmallest, Lily, was bewitching in her naïve astonishment at everything,and it was difficult not to smile when, after taking the sacrament, shesaid in English, "Please, some more."
On the way home the children felt that something solemn had happened,and were very sedate.
Everything went happily at home too; but at lunch Grisha beganwhistling, and, what was worse, was disobedient to the Englishgoverness, and was forbidden to have any tart. Darya Alexandrovna wouldnot have let things go so far on such a day had she been present; butshe had to support the English governess’s authority, and she upheld herdecision that Grisha should have no tart. This rather spoiled thegeneral good humor. Grisha cried, declaring that Nikolinka had whistledtoo, and he was not punished, and that he wasn’t crying for the tart—hedidn’t care—but at being unjustly treated. This was really too tragic,and Darya Alexandrovna made up her mind to persuade the Englishgoverness to forgive Grisha, and she went to speak to her. But on theway, as she passed the drawing room, she beheld a scene, filling herheart with such pleasure that the tears came into her eyes, and sheforgave the delinquent herself.
The culprit was sitting at the window in the corner of the drawing room;beside him was standing Tanya with a plate. On the pretext of wanting togive some dinner to her dolls, she had asked the governess’s permissionto take her share of tart to the nursery, and had taken it instead toher brother. While still weeping over the injustice of his punishment,he was eating the tart, and kept saying through his sobs, "Eat yourself;let’s eat it together ... together."
Tanya had at first been under the influence of her pity for Grisha, thenof a sense of her noble action, and tears were standing in her eyes too;but she did not refuse, and ate her share.
On catching sight of their mother they were dismayed, but, looking intoher face, they saw they were not doing wrong. They burst out laughing,and, with their mouths full of tart, they began wiping their smilinglips with their hands, and smearing their radiant faces all over withtears and jam.
"Mercy! Your new white frock! Tanya! Grisha!" said their mother, tryingto save the frock, but with tears in her eyes, smiling a blissful,rapturous smile.
The new frocks were taken off, and orders were given for the littlegirls to have their blouses put on, and the boys their old jackets, andthe wagonette to be harnessed; with Brownie, to the bailiff’s annoyance,again in the shafts, to drive out for mushroom picking and bathing. Aroar of delighted shrieks arose in the nursery, and never ceased tillthey had set off for the bathing-place.
They gathered a whole basketful of mushrooms; even Lily found a birchmushroom. It had always happened before that Miss Hoole found them andpointed them out to her; but this time she found a big one quite ofherself, and there was a general scream of delight, "Lily has found amushroom!"
Then they reached the river, put the horses under the birch trees, andwent to the bathing-place. The coachman, Terenty, fastened the horses,who kept whisking away the flies, to a tree, and, treading down thegrass, lay down in the shade of a birch and smoked his shag, while thenever-ceasing shrieks of delight of the children floated across to himfrom the bathing-place.
Though it was hard work to look after all the children and restraintheir wild pranks, though it was difficult too to keep in one’s head andnot mix up all the stockings, little breeches, and shoes for thedifferent legs, and to undo and to do up again all the tapes andbuttons, Darya Alexandrovna, who had always liked bathing herself, andbelieved it to be very good for the children, enjoyed nothing so much asbathing with all the children. To go over all those fat little legs,pulling on their stockings, to take in her arms and dip those littlenaked bodies, and to hear their screams of delight and alarm, to see thebreathless faces with wide-open, scared, and happy eyes of all hersplashing cherubs, was a great pleasure to her.
When half the children had been dressed, some peasant women in holidaydress, out picking herbs, came up to the bathing-shed and stopped shyly.Marya Philimonovna called one of them and handed her a sheet and a shirtthat had dropped into the water for her to dry them, and DaryaAlexandrovna began to talk to the women. At first they laughed behindtheir hands and did not understand her questions, but soon they grewbolder and began to talk, winning Darya Alexandrovna’s heart at once bythe genuine admiration of the children that they showed.
"My, what a beauty! as white as sugar," said one, admiring Tanitchka,and shaking her head; "but thin..."
"Yes, she has been ill."
"And so they’ve been bathing you too," said another to the baby.
"No; he’s only three months old," answered Darya Alexandrovna withpride.
"You don’t say so!"
"And have you any children?"
"I’ve had four; I’ve two living—a boy and a girl. I weaned her lastcarnival."
"How old is she?"
"Why, two years old."
"Why did you nurse her so long?"
"It’s our custom; for three fasts..."
And the conversation became most interesting to Darya Alexandrovna. Whatsort of time did she have? What was the matter with the boy? Where washer husband? Did it often happen?
Darya Alexandrovna felt disinclined to leave the peasant women, sointeresting to her was their conversation, so completely identical wereall their interests. What pleased her most of all was that she sawclearly what all the women admired more than anything was her having somany children, and such fine ones. The peasant women even made DaryaAlexandrovna laugh, and offended the English governess, because she wasthe cause of the laughter she did not understand. One of the youngerwomen kept staring at the Englishwoman, who was dressing after all therest, and when she put on her third petticoat she could not refrain fromthe remark, "My, she keeps putting on and putting on, and she’ll neverhave done!" she said, and they all went off into roars.


Chapter 9

On the drive home, as Darya Alexandrovna, with all her children roundher, their heads still wet from their bath, and a kerchief tied over herown head, was getting near the house, the coachman said, "There’s somegentleman coming: the master of Pokrovskoe, I do believe."
Darya Alexandrovna peeped out in front, and was delighted when sherecognized in the gray hat and gray coat the familiar figure of Levinwalking to meet them. She was glad to see him at any time, but at thismoment she was specially glad he should see her in all her glory. No onewas better able to appreciate her grandeur than Levin.
Seeing her, he found himself face to face with one of the pictures ofhis daydream of family life.
"You’re like a hen with your chickens, Darya Alexandrovna."
"Ah, how glad I am to see you!" she said, holding out her hand to him.
"Glad to see me, but you didn’t let me know. My brother’s staying withme. I got a note from Stiva that you were here."
"From Stiva?" Darya Alexandrovna asked with surprise.
"Yes; he writes that you are here, and that he thinks you might allow meto be of use to you," said Levin, and as he said it he became suddenlyembarrassed, and, stopping abruptly, he walked on in silence by thewagonette, snapping off the buds of the lime trees and nibbling them. Hewas embarrassed through a sense that Darya Alexandrovna would be annoyedby receiving from an outsider help that should by rights have come fromher own husband. Darya Alexandrovna certainly did not like this littleway of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s of foisting his domestic duties on others.And she was at once aware that Levin was aware of this. It was just forthis fineness of perception, for this delicacy, that Darya Alexandrovnaliked Levin.
"I know, of course," said Levin, "that that simply means that you wouldlike to see me, and I’m exceedingly glad. Though I can fancy that, usedto town housekeeping as you are, you must feel in the wilds here, and ifthere’s anything wanted, I’m altogether at your disposal."
"Oh, no!" said Dolly. "At first things were rather uncomfortable, butnow we’ve settled everything capitally—thanks to my old nurse," shesaid, indicating Marya Philimonovna, who, seeing that they were speakingof her, smiled brightly and cordially to Levin. She knew him, and knewthat he would be a good match for her young lady, and was very keen tosee the matter settled.
"Won’t you get in, sir, we’ll make room this side!" she said to him.
"No, I’ll walk. Children, who’d like to race the horses with me?" Thechildren knew Levin very little, and could not remember when they hadseen him, but they experienced in regard to him none of that strangefeeling of shyness and hostility which children so often experiencetowards hypocritical, grown-up people, and for which they are so oftenand miserably punished. Hypocrisy in anything whatever may deceive thecleverest and most penetrating man, but the least wide-awake of childrenrecognizes it, and is revolted by it, however ingeniously it may bedisguised. Whatever faults Levin had, there was not a trace of hypocrisyin him, and so the children showed him the same friendliness that theysaw in their mother’s face. On his invitation, the two elder ones atonce jumped out to him and ran with him as simply as they would havedone with their nurse or Miss Hoole or their mother. Lily, too, beganbegging to go to him, and her mother handed her to him; he sat her onhis shoulder and ran along with her.
"Don’t be afraid, don’t be afraid, Darya Alexandrovna!" he said, smilinggood-humoredly to the mother; "there’s no chance of my hurting ordropping her."
And, looking at his strong, agile, assiduously careful and needlesslywary movements, the mother felt her mind at rest, and smiled gaily andapprovingly as she watched him.
Here, in the country, with children, and with Darya Alexandrovna, withwhom he was in sympathy, Levin was in a mood not infrequent with him, ofchildlike light-heartedness that she particularly liked in him. As heran with the children, he taught them gymnastic feats, set Miss Hoolelaughing with his queer English accent, and talked to Darya Alexandrovnaof his pursuits in the country.
After dinner, Darya Alexandrovna, sitting alone with him on the balcony,began to speak of Kitty.
"You know, Kitty’s coming here, and is going to spend the summer withme."
"Really," he said, flushing, and at once, to change the conversation, hesaid: "Then I’ll send you two cows, shall I? If you insist on a bill youshall pay me five roubles a month; but it’s really too bad of you."
"No, thank you. We can manage very well now."
"Oh, well, then, I’ll have a look at your cows, and if you’ll allow me,I’ll give directions about their food. Everything depends on theirfood."
And Levin, to turn the conversation, explained to Darya Alexandrovna thetheory of cow-keeping, based on the principle that the cow is simply amachine for the transformation of food into milk, and so on.
He talked of this, and passionately longed to hear more of Kitty, and,at the same time, was afraid of hearing it. He dreaded the breaking upof the inward peace he had gained with such effort.
"Yes, but still all this has to be looked after, and who is there tolook after it?" Darya Alexandrovna responded, without interest.
She had by now got her household matters so satisfactorily arranged,thanks to Marya Philimonovna, that she was disinclined to make anychange in them; besides, she had no faith in Levin’s knowledge offarming. General principles, as to the cow being a machine for theproduction of milk, she looked on with suspicion. It seemed to her thatsuch principles could only be a hindrance in farm management. It allseemed to her a far simpler matter: all that was needed, as MaryaPhilimonovna had explained, was to give Brindle and Whitebreast morefood and drink, and not to let the cook carry all the kitchen slops tothe laundry maid’s cow. That was clear. But general propositions as tofeeding on meal and on grass were doubtful and obscure. And, what wasmost important, she wanted to talk about Kitty.


Chapter 10

"Kitty writes to me that there’s nothing she longs for so much as quietand solitude," Dolly said after the silence that had followed.
"And how is she—better?" Levin asked in agitation.
"Thank God, she’s quite well again. I never believed her lungs wereaffected."
"Oh, I’m very glad!" said Levin, and Dolly fancied she saw somethingtouching, helpless, in his face as he said this and looked silently intoher face.
"Let me ask you, Konstantin Dmitrievitch," said Darya Alexandrovna,smiling her kindly and rather mocking smile, "why is it you are angrywith Kitty?"
"I? I’m not angry with her," said Levin.
"Yes, you are angry. Why was it you did not come to see us nor them whenyou were in Moscow?"
"Darya Alexandrovna," he said, blushing up to the roots of his hair, "Iwonder really that with your kind heart you don’t feel this. How it isyou feel no pity for me, if nothing else, when you know..."
"What do I know?"
"You know I made an offer and that I was refused," said Levin, and allthe tenderness he had been feeling for Kitty a minute before wasreplaced by a feeling of anger for the slight he had suffered.
"What makes you suppose I know?"
"Because everybody knows it..."
"That’s just where you are mistaken; I did not know it, though I hadguessed it was so."
"Well, now you know it."
"All I knew was that something had happened that made her dreadfullymiserable, and that she begged me never to speak of it. And if she wouldnot tell me, she would certainly not speak of it to anyone else. Butwhat did pass between you? Tell me."
"I have told you."
"When was it?"
"When I was at their house the last time."
"Do you know that," said Darya Alexandrovna, "I am awfully, awfullysorry for her. You suffer only from pride...."
"Perhaps so," said Levin, "but..."
She interrupted him.
"But she, poor girl ... I am awfully, awfully sorry for her. Now I seeit all."
"Well, Darya Alexandrovna, you must excuse me," he said, getting up."Good-bye, Darya Alexandrovna, till we meet again."
"No, wait a minute," she said, clutching him by the sleeve. "Wait aminute, sit down."
"Please, please, don’t let us talk of this," he said, sitting down, andat the same time feeling rise up and stir within his heart a hope he hadbelieved to be buried.
"If I did not like you," she said, and tears came into her eyes; "if Idid not know you, as I do know you . . ."
The feeling that had seemed dead revived more and more, rose up and tookpossession of Levin’s heart.
"Yes, I understand it all now," said Darya Alexandrovna. "You can’tunderstand it; for you men, who are free and make your own choice, it’salways clear whom you love. But a girl’s in a position of suspense, withall a woman’s or maiden’s modesty, a girl who sees you men from afar,who takes everything on trust,—a girl may have, and often has, such afeeling that she cannot tell what to say."
"Yes, if the heart does not speak..."
"No, the heart does speak; but just consider: you men have views about agirl, you come to the house, you make friends, you criticize, you waitto see if you have found what you love, and then, when you are sure youlove her, you make an offer...."
"Well, that’s not quite it."
"Anyway you make an offer, when your love is ripe or when the balancehas completely turned between the two you are choosing from. But a girlis not asked. She is expected to make her choice, and yet she cannotchoose, she can only answer ‘yes’ or ‘no.’"
"Yes, to choose between me and Vronsky," thought Levin, and the deadthing that had come to life within him died again, and only weighed onhis heart and set it aching.
"Darya Alexandrovna," he said, "that’s how one chooses a new dress orsome purchase or other, not love. The choice has been made, and so muchthe better.... And there can be no repeating it."
"Ah, pride, pride!" said Darya Alexandrovna, as though despising him forthe baseness of this feeling in comparison with that other feeling whichonly women know. "At the time when you made Kitty an offer she was justin a position in which she could not answer. She was in doubt. Doubtbetween you and Vronsky. Him she was seeing every day, and you she hadnot seen for a long while. Supposing she had been older ... I, forinstance, in her place could have felt no doubt. I always disliked him,and so it has turned out."
Levin recalled Kitty’s answer. She had said: "_No, that cannot be_..."
"Darya Alexandrovna," he said dryly, "I appreciate your confidence inme; I believe you are making a mistake. But whether I am right or wrong,that pride you so despise makes any thought of Katerina Alexandrovna outof the question for me,—you understand, utterly out of the question."
"I will only say one thing more: you know that I am speaking of mysister, whom I love as I love my own children. I don’t say she cared foryou, all I meant to say is that her refusal at that moment provesnothing."
"I don’t know!" said Levin, jumping up. "If you only knew how you arehurting me. It’s just as if a child of yours were dead, and they were tosay to you: He would have been like this and like that, and he mighthave lived, and how happy you would have been in him. But he’s dead,dead, dead!..."
"How absurd you are!" said Darya Alexandrovna, looking with mournfultenderness at Levin’s excitement. "Yes, I see it all more and moreclearly," she went on musingly. "So you won’t come to see us, then, whenKitty’s here?"
"No, I shan’t come. Of course I won’t avoid meeting KaterinaAlexandrovna, but as far as I can, I will try to save her the annoyanceof my presence."
"You are very, very absurd," repeated Darya Alexandrovna, looking withtenderness into his face. "Very well then, let it be as though we hadnot spoken of this. What have you come for, Tanya?" she said in Frenchto the little girl who had come in.
"Where’s my spade, mamma?"
"I speak French, and you must too."
The little girl tried to say it in French, but could not remember theFrench for spade; the mother prompted her, and then told her in Frenchwhere to look for the spade. And this made a disagreeable impression onLevin.
Everything in Darya Alexandrovna’s house and children struck him now asby no means so charming as a little while before. "And what does shetalk French with the children for?" he thought; "how unnatural and falseit is! And the children feel it so: Learning French and unlearningsincerity," he thought to himself, unaware that Darya Alexandrovna hadthought all that over twenty times already, and yet, even at the cost ofsome loss of sincerity, believed it necessary to teach her childrenFrench in that way.
"But why are you going? Do stay a little."
Levin stayed to tea; but his good-humor had vanished, and he felt ill atease.
After tea he went out into the hall to order his horses to be put in,and, when he came back, he found Darya Alexandrovna greatly disturbed,with a troubled face, and tears in her eyes. While Levin had beenoutside, an incident had occurred which had utterly shattered all thehappiness she had been feeling that day, and her pride in her children.Grisha and Tanya had been fighting over a ball. Darya Alexandrovna,hearing a scream in the nursery, ran in and saw a terrible sight. Tanyawas pulling Grisha’s hair, while he, with a face hideous with rage, wasbeating her with his fists wherever he could get at her. Somethingsnapped in Darya Alexandrovna’s heart when she saw this. It was as ifdarkness had swooped down upon her life; she felt that these children ofhers, that she was so proud of, were not merely most ordinary, butpositively bad, ill-bred children, with coarse, brutalpropensities—wicked children.
She could not talk or think of anything else, and she could not speak toLevin of her misery.
Levin saw she was unhappy and tried to comfort her, saying that itshowed nothing bad, that all children fight; but, even as he said it, hewas thinking in his heart: "No, I won’t be artificial and talk Frenchwith my children; but my children won’t be like that. All one has to dois not spoil children, not to distort their nature, and they’ll bedelightful. No, my children won’t be like that."
He said good-bye and drove away, and she did not try to keep him.


Chapter 11

In the middle of July the elder of the village on Levin’s sister’sestate, about fifteen miles from Pokrovskoe, came to Levin to report onhow things were going there and on the hay. The chief source of incomeon his sister’s estate was from the riverside meadows. In former yearsthe hay had been bought by the peasants for twenty roubles the threeacres. When Levin took over the management of the estate, he thought onexamining the grasslands that they were worth more, and he fixed theprice at twenty-five roubles the three acres. The peasants would notgive that price, and, as Levin suspected, kept off other purchasers.Then Levin had driven over himself, and arranged to have the grass cut,partly by hired labor, partly at a payment of a certain proportion ofthe crop. His own peasants put every hindrance they could in the way ofthis new arrangement, but it was carried out, and the first year themeadows had yielded a profit almost double. The previous year—which wasthe third year—the peasants had maintained the same opposition to thearrangement, and the hay had been cut on the same system. This year thepeasants were doing all the mowing for a third of the hay crop, and thevillage elder had come now to announce that the hay had been cut, andthat, fearing rain, they had invited the counting-house clerk over, haddivided the crop in his presence, and had raked together eleven stacksas the owner’s share. From the vague answers to his question how muchhay had been cut on the principal meadow, from the hurry of the villageelder who had made the division, not asking leave, from the whole toneof the peasant, Levin perceived that there was something wrong in thedivision of the hay, and made up his mind to drive over himself to lookinto the matter.
Arriving for dinner at the village, and leaving his horse at the cottageof an old friend of his, the husband of his brother’s wet-nurse, Levinwent to see the old man in his bee-house, wanting to find out from himthe truth about the hay. Parmenitch, a talkative, comely old man, gaveLevin a very warm welcome, showed him all he was doing, told himeverything about his bees and the swarms of that year; but gave vagueand unwilling answers to Levin’s inquiries about the mowing. Thisconfirmed Levin still more in his suspicions. He went to the hay fieldsand examined the stacks. The haystacks could not possibly contain fiftywagon-loads each, and to convict the peasants Levin ordered the wagonsthat had carried the hay to be brought up directly, to lift one stack,and carry it into the barn. There turned out to be only thirty-two loadsin the stack. In spite of the village elder’s assertions about thecompressibility of hay, and its having settled down in the stacks, andhis swearing that everything had been done in the fear of God, Levinstuck to his point that the hay had been divided without his orders, andthat, therefore, he would not accept that hay as fifty loads to a stack.After a prolonged dispute the matter was decided by the peasants takingthese eleven stacks, reckoning them as fifty loads each. The argumentsand the division of the haycocks lasted the whole afternoon. When thelast of the hay had been divided, Levin, intrusting the superintendenceof the rest to the counting-house clerk, sat down on a haycock markedoff by a stake of willow, and looked admiringly at the meadow swarmingwith peasants.
In front of him, in the bend of the river beyond the marsh, moved abright-colored line of peasant women, and the scattered hay was beingrapidly formed into gray winding rows over the pale green stubble. Afterthe women came the men with pitchforks, and from the gray rows therewere growing up broad, high, soft haycocks. To the left, carts wererumbling over the meadow that had been already cleared, and one afteranother the haycocks vanished, flung up in huge forkfuls, and in theirplace there were rising heavy cartloads of fragrant hay hanging over thehorses’ hind-quarters.
"What weather for haying! What hay it’ll be!" said an old man, squattingdown beside Levin. "It’s tea, not hay! It’s like scattering grain to theducks, the way they pick it up!" he added, pointing to the growinghaycocks. "Since dinnertime they’ve carried a good half of it."
"The last load, eh?" he shouted to a young peasant, who drove by,standing in the front of an empty cart, shaking the cord reins.
"The last, dad!" the lad shouted back, pulling in the horse, and,smiling, he looked round at a bright, rosy-checked peasant girl who satin the cart smiling too, and drove on.
"Who’s that? Your son?" asked Levin.
"My baby," said the old man with a tender smile.
"What a fine fellow!"
"The lad’s all right."
"Married already?"
"Yes, it’s two years last St. Philip’s day."
"Any children?"
"Children indeed! Why, for over a year he was innocent as a babehimself, and bashful too," answered the old man. "Well, the hay! It’s asfragrant as tea!" he repeated, wishing to change the subject.
Levin looked more attentively at Ivan Parmenov and his wife. They wereloading a haycock onto the cart not far from him. Ivan Parmenov wasstanding on the cart, taking, laying in place, and stamping down thehuge bundles of hay, which his pretty young wife deftly handed up tohim, at first in armfuls, and then on the pitchfork. The young wifeworked easily, merrily, and dexterously. The close-packed hay did notonce break away off her fork. First she gathered it together, stuck thefork into it, then with a rapid, supple movement leaned the whole weightof her body on it, and at once with a bend of her back under the redbelt she drew herself up, and arching her full bosom under the whitesmock, with a smart turn swung the fork in her arms, and flung thebundle of hay high onto the cart. Ivan, obviously doing his best to saveher every minute of unnecessary labor, made haste, opening his arms toclutch the bundle and lay it in the cart. As she raked together what wasleft of the hay, the young wife shook off the bits of hay that hadfallen on her neck, and straightening the red kerchief that had droppedforward over her white brow, not browned like her face by the sun, shecrept under the cart to tie up the load. Ivan directed her how to fastenthe cord to the cross-piece, and at something she said he laughed aloud.In the expressions of both faces was to be seen vigorous, young, freshlyawakened love.


Chapter 12

The load was tied on. Ivan jumped down and took the quiet, sleek horseby the bridle. The young wife flung the rake up on the load, and with abold step, swinging her arms, she went to join the women, who wereforming a ring for the haymakers’ dance. Ivan drove off to the road andfell into line with the other loaded carts. The peasant women, withtheir rakes on their shoulders, gay with bright flowers, and chatteringwith ringing, merry voices, walked behind the hay cart. One wilduntrained female voice broke into a song, and sang it alone through averse, and then the same verse was taken up and repeated by half ahundred strong healthy voices, of all sorts, coarse and fine, singing inunison.
The women, all singing, began to come close to Levin, and he felt asthough a storm were swooping down upon him with a thunder of merriment.The storm swooped down, enveloped him and the haycock on which he waslying, and the other haycocks, and the wagon-loads, and the whole meadowand distant fields all seemed to be shaking and singing to the measuresof this wild merry song with its shouts and whistles and clapping. Levinfelt envious of this health and mirthfulness; he longed to take part inthe expression of this joy of life. But he could do nothing, and had tolie and look on and listen. When the peasants, with their singing, hadvanished out of sight and hearing, a weary feeling of despondency at hisown isolation, his physical inactivity, his alienation from this world,came over Levin.
Some of the very peasants who had been most active in wrangling with himover the hay, some whom he had treated with contumely, and who had triedto cheat him, those very peasants had greeted him goodhumoredly, andevidently had not, were incapable of having any feeling of rancoragainst him, any regret, any recollection even of having tried todeceive him. All that was drowned in a sea of merry common labor. Godgave the day, God gave the strength. And the day and the strength wereconsecrated to labor, and that labor was its own reward. For whom thelabor? What would be its fruits? These were idle considerations—besidethe point.
Often Levin had admired this life, often he had a sense of envy of themen who led this life; but today for the first time, especially underthe influence of what he had seen in the attitude of Ivan Parmenov tohis young wife, the idea presented itself definitely to his mind that itwas in his power to exchange the dreary, artificial, idle, andindividualistic life he was leading for this laborious, pure, andsocially delightful life.
The old man who had been sitting beside him had long ago gone home; thepeople had all separated. Those who lived near had gone home, whilethose who came from far were gathered into a group for supper, and tospend the night in the meadow. Levin, unobserved by the peasants, stilllay on the haycock, and still looked on and listened and mused. Thepeasants who remained for the night in the meadow scarcely slept all theshort summer night. At first there was the sound of merry talk andlaughing all together over the supper, then singing again and laughter.
All the long day of toil had left no trace in them but lightness ofheart. Before the early dawn all was hushed. Nothing was to be heard butthe night sounds of the frogs that never ceased in the marsh, and thehorses snorting in the mist that rose over the meadow before themorning. Rousing himself, Levin got up from the haycock, and looking atthe stars, he saw that the night was over.
"Well, what am I going to do? How am I to set about it?" he said tohimself, trying to express to himself all the thoughts and feelings hehad passed through in that brief night. All the thoughts and feelings hehad passed through fell into three separate trains of thought. One wasthe renunciation of his old life, of his utterly useless education. Thisrenunciation gave him satisfaction, and was easy and simple. Anotherseries of thoughts and mental images related to the life he longed tolive now. The simplicity, the purity, the sanity of this life he feltclearly, and he was convinced he would find in it the content, thepeace, and the dignity, of the lack of which he was so miserablyconscious. But a third series of ideas turned upon the question how toeffect this transition from the old life to the new. And there nothingtook clear shape for him. "Have a wife? Have work and the necessity ofwork? Leave Pokrovskoe? Buy land? Become a member of a peasantcommunity? Marry a peasant girl? How am I to set about it?" he askedhimself again, and could not find an answer. "I haven’t slept all night,though, and I can’t think it out clearly," he said to himself. "I’llwork it out later. One thing’s certain, this night has decided my fate.All my old dreams of home life were absurd, not the real thing," he toldhimself. "It’s all ever so much simpler and better..."
"How beautiful!" he thought, looking at the strange, as it were,mother-of-pearl shell of white fleecy cloudlets resting right over hishead in the middle of the sky. "How exquisite it all is in thisexquisite night! And when was there time for that cloud-shell to form?Just now I looked at the sky, and there was nothing in it—only two whitestreaks. Yes, and so imperceptibly too my views of life changed!"
He went out of the meadow and walked along the highroad towards thevillage. A slight wind arose, and the sky looked gray and sullen. Thegloomy moment had come that usually precedes the dawn, the full triumphof light over darkness.
Shrinking from the cold, Levin walked rapidly, looking at the ground."What’s that? Someone coming," he thought, catching the tinkle of bells,and lifting his head. Forty paces from him a carriage with four horsesharnessed abreast was driving towards him along the grassy road on whichhe was walking. The shaft-horses were tilted against the shafts by theruts, but the dexterous driver sitting on the box held the shaft overthe ruts, so that the wheels ran on the smooth part of the road.
This was all Levin noticed, and without wondering who it could be, hegazed absently at the coach.
In the coach was an old lady dozing in one corner, and at the window,evidently only just awake, sat a young girl holding in both hands theribbons of a white cap. With a face full of light and thought, full of asubtle, complex inner life, that was remote from Levin, she was gazingbeyond him at the glow of the sunrise.
At the very instant when this apparition was vanishing, the truthfuleyes glanced at him. She recognized him, and her face lighted up withwondering delight.
He could not be mistaken. There were no other eyes like those in theworld. There was only one creature in the world that could concentratefor him all the brightness and meaning of life. It was she. It wasKitty. He understood that she was driving to Ergushovo from the railwaystation. And everything that had been stirring Levin during thatsleepless night, all the resolutions he had made, all vanished at once.He recalled with horror his dreams of marrying a peasant girl. Thereonly, in the carriage that had crossed over to the other side of theroad, and was rapidly disappearing, there only could he find thesolution of the riddle of his life, which had weighed so agonizinglyupon him of late.
She did not look out again. The sound of the carriage-springs was nolonger audible, the bells could scarcely be heard. The barking of dogsshowed the carriage had reached the village, and all that was left wasthe empty fields all round, the village in front, and he himselfisolated and apart from it all, wandering lonely along the desertedhighroad.
He glanced at the sky, expecting to find there the cloud shell he hadbeen admiring and taking as the symbol of the ideas and feelings of thatnight. There was nothing in the sky in the least like a shell. There, inthe remote heights above, a mysterious change had been accomplished.There was no trace of shell, and there was stretched over fully half thesky an even cover of tiny and ever tinier cloudlets. The sky had grownblue and bright; and with the same softness, but with the sameremoteness, it met his questioning gaze.
"No," he said to himself, "however good that life of simplicity and toilmay be, I cannot go back to it. I love _her_."


Chapter 13

None but those who were most intimate with Alexey Alexandrovitch knewthat, while on the surface the coldest and most reasonable of men, hehad one weakness quite opposed to the general trend of his character.Alexey Alexandrovitch could not hear or see a child or woman cryingwithout being moved. The sight of tears threw him into a state ofnervous agitation, and he utterly lost all power of reflection. Thechief secretary of his department and his private secretary were awareof this, and used to warn women who came with petitions on no account togive way to tears, if they did not want to ruin their chances. "He willget angry, and will not listen to you," they used to say. And as a fact,in such cases the emotional disturbance set up in Alexey Alexandrovitchby the sight of tears found expression in hasty anger. "I can donothing. Kindly leave the room!" he would commonly cry in such cases.
When returning from the races Anna had informed him of her relationswith Vronsky, and immediately afterwards had burst into tears, hidingher face in her hands, Alexey Alexandrovitch, for all the fury arousedin him against her, was aware at the same time of a rush of thatemotional disturbance always produced in him by tears. Conscious of it,and conscious that any expression of his feelings at that minute wouldbe out of keeping with the position, he tried to suppress everymanifestation of life in himself, and so neither stirred nor looked ather. This was what had caused that strange expression of deathlikerigidity in his face which had so impressed Anna.
When they reached the house he helped her to get out of the carriage,and making an effort to master himself, took leave of her with his usualurbanity, and uttered that phrase that bound him to nothing; he saidthat tomorrow he would let her know his decision.
His wife’s words, confirming his worst suspicions, had sent a cruel pangto the heart of Alexey Alexandrovitch. That pang was intensified by thestrange feeling of physical pity for her set up by her tears. But whenhe was all alone in the carriage Alexey Alexandrovitch, to his surpriseand delight, felt complete relief both from this pity and from thedoubts and agonies of jealousy.
He experienced the sensations of a man who has had a tooth out aftersuffering long from toothache. After a fearful agony and a sense ofsomething huge, bigger than the head itself, being torn out of his jaw,the sufferer, hardly able to believe in his own good luck, feels all atonce that what has so long poisoned his existence and enchained hisattention, exists no longer, and that he can live and think again, andtake interest in other things besides his tooth. This feeling AlexeyAlexandrovitch was experiencing. The agony had been strange andterrible, but now it was over; he felt that he could live again andthink of something other than his wife.
"No honor, no heart, no religion; a corrupt woman. I always knew it andalways saw it, though I tried to deceive myself to spare her," he saidto himself. And it actually seemed to him that he always had seen it: herecalled incidents of their past life, in which he had never seenanything wrong before—now these incidents proved clearly that she hadalways been a corrupt woman. "I made a mistake in linking my life tohers; but there was nothing wrong in my mistake, and so I cannot beunhappy. It’s not I that am to blame," he told himself, "but she. But Ihave nothing to do with her. She does not exist for me..."
Everything relating to her and her son, towards whom his sentiments wereas much changed as towards her, ceased to interest him. The only thingthat interested him now was the question of in what way he could best,with most propriety and comfort for himself, and thus with most justice,extricate himself from the mud with which she had spattered him in herfall, and then proceed along his path of active, honorable, and usefulexistence.
"I cannot be made unhappy by the fact that a contemptible woman hascommitted a crime. I have only to find the best way out of the difficultposition in which she has placed me. And I shall find it," he said tohimself, frowning more and more. "I’m not the first nor the last." Andto say nothing of historical instances dating from the "Fair Helen" ofMenelaus, recently revived in the memory of all, a whole list ofcontemporary examples of husbands with unfaithful wives in the highestsociety rose before Alexey Alexandrovitch’s imagination. "Daryalov,Poltavsky, Prince Karibanov, Count Paskudin, Dram.... Yes, even Dram,such an honest, capable fellow ... Semyonov, Tchagin, Sigonin," AlexeyAlexandrovitch remembered. "Admitting that a certain quite irrational_ridicule_ falls to the lot of these men, yet I never saw anything but amisfortune in it, and always felt sympathy for it," AlexeyAlexandrovitch said to himself, though indeed this was not the fact, andhe had never felt sympathy for misfortunes of that kind, but the morefrequently he had heard of instances of unfaithful wives betraying theirhusbands, the more highly he had thought of himself. "It is a misfortunewhich may befall anyone. And this misfortune has befallen me. The onlything to be done is to make the best of the position."
And he began passing in review the methods of proceeding of men who hadbeen in the same position that he was in.
"Daryalov fought a duel...."
The duel had particularly fascinated the thoughts of AlexeyAlexandrovitch in his youth, just because he was physically a coward,and was himself well aware of the fact. Alexey Alexandrovitch could notwithout horror contemplate the idea of a pistol aimed at himself, andhad never made use of any weapon in his life. This horror had in hisyouth set him pondering on dueling, and picturing himself in a positionin which he would have to expose his life to danger. Having attainedsuccess and an established position in the world, he had long agoforgotten this feeling; but the habitual bent of feeling reasserteditself, and dread of his own cowardice proved even now so strong thatAlexey Alexandrovitch spent a long while thinking over the question ofdueling in all its aspects, and hugging the idea of a duel, though hewas fully aware beforehand that he would never under any circumstancesfight one.
"There’s no doubt our society is still so barbarous (it’s not the samein England) that very many"—and among these were those whose opinionAlexey Alexandrovitch particularly valued—"look favorably on the duel;but what result is attained by it? Suppose I call him out," AlexeyAlexandrovitch went on to himself, and vividly picturing the night hewould spend after the challenge, and the pistol aimed at him, heshuddered, and knew that he never would do it—"suppose I call him out.Suppose I am taught," he went on musing, "to shoot; I press thetrigger," he said to himself, closing his eyes, "and it turns out I havekilled him," Alexey Alexandrovitch said to himself, and he shook hishead as though to dispel such silly ideas. "What sense is there inmurdering a man in order to define one’s relation to a guilty wife andson? I should still just as much have to decide what I ought to do withher. But what is more probable and what would doubtless occur—I shouldbe killed or wounded. I, the innocent person, should be thevictim—killed or wounded. It’s even more senseless. But apart from that,a challenge to fight would be an act hardly honest on my side. Don’t Iknow perfectly well that my friends would never allow me to fight aduel—would never allow the life of a statesman, needed by Russia, to beexposed to danger? Knowing perfectly well beforehand that the matterwould never come to real danger, it would amount to my simply trying togain a certain sham reputation by such a challenge. That would bedishonest, that would be false, that would be deceiving myself andothers. A duel is quite irrational, and no one expects it of me. My aimis simply to safeguard my reputation, which is essential for theuninterrupted pursuit of my public duties." Official duties, which hadalways been of great consequence in Alexey Alexandrovitch’s eyes, seemedof special importance to his mind at this moment. Considering andrejecting the duel, Alexey Alexandrovitch turned to divorce—anothersolution selected by several of the husbands he remembered. Passing inmental review all the instances he knew of divorces (there were plentyof them in the very highest society with which he was very familiar),Alexey Alexandrovitch could not find a single example in which theobject of divorce was that which he had in view. In all these instancesthe husband had practically ceded or sold his unfaithful wife, and thevery party which, being in fault, had not the right to contract a freshmarriage, had formed counterfeit, pseudo-matrimonial ties with aself-styled husband. In his own case, Alexey Alexandrovitch saw that alegal divorce, that is to say, one in which only the guilty wife wouldbe repudiated, was impossible of attainment. He saw that the complexconditions of the life they led made the coarse proofs of his wife’sguilt, required by the law, out of the question; he saw that a certainrefinement in that life would not admit of such proofs being broughtforward, even if he had them, and that to bring forward such proofswould damage him in the public estimation more than it would her.
An attempt at divorce could lead to nothing but a public scandal, whichwould be a perfect godsend to his enemies for calumny and attacks on hishigh position in society. His chief object, to define the position withthe least amount of disturbance possible, would not be attained bydivorce either. Moreover, in the event of divorce, or even of an attemptto obtain a divorce, it was obvious that the wife broke off allrelations with the husband and threw in her lot with the lover. And inspite of the complete, as he supposed, contempt and indifference he nowfelt for his wife, at the bottom of his heart Alexey Alexandrovitchstill had one feeling left in regard to her—a disinclination to see herfree to throw in her lot with Vronsky, so that her crime would be to heradvantage. The mere notion of this so exasperated Alexey Alexandrovitch,that directly it rose to his mind he groaned with inward agony, and gotup and changed his place in the carriage, and for a long while after, hesat with scowling brows, wrapping his numbed and bony legs in the fleecyrug.
"Apart from formal divorce, One might still do like Karibanov, Paskudin,and that good fellow Dram—that is, separate from one’s wife," he went onthinking, when he had regained his composure. But this step toopresented the same drawback of public scandal as a divorce, and what wasmore, a separation, quite as much as a regular divorce, flung his wifeinto the arms of Vronsky. "No, it’s out of the question, out of thequestion!" he said again, twisting his rug about him again. "I cannot beunhappy, but neither she nor he ought to be happy."
The feeling of jealousy, which had tortured him during the period ofuncertainty, had passed away at the instant when the tooth had been withagony extracted by his wife’s words. But that feeling had been replacedby another, the desire, not merely that she should not be triumphant,but that she should get due punishment for her crime. He did notacknowledge this feeling, but at the bottom of his heart he longed forher to suffer for having destroyed his peace of mind—his honor. Andgoing once again over the conditions inseparable from a duel, a divorce,a separation, and once again rejecting them, Alexey Alexandrovitch feltconvinced that there was only one solution,—to keep her with him,concealing what had happened from the world, and using every measure inhis power to break off the intrigue, and still more—though this he didnot admit to himself—to punish her. "I must inform her of my conclusion,that thinking over the terrible position in which she has placed herfamily, all other solutions will be worse for both sides than anexternal _status quo_, and that such I agree to retain, on the strictcondition of obedience on her part to my wishes, that is to say,cessation of all intercourse with her lover." When this decision hadbeen finally adopted, another weighty consideration occurred to AlexeyAlexandrovitch in support of it. "By such a course only shall I beacting in accordance with the dictates of religion," he told himself."In adopting this course, I am not casting off a guilty wife, but givingher a chance of amendment; and, indeed, difficult as the task will be tome, I shall devote part of my energies to her reformation andsalvation."
Though Alexey Alexandrovitch was perfectly aware that he could not exertany moral influence over his wife, that such an attempt at reformationcould lead to nothing but falsity; though in passing through thesedifficult moments he had not once thought of seeking guidance inreligion, yet now, when his conclusion corresponded, as it seemed tohim, with the requirements of religion, this religious sanction to hisdecision gave him complete satisfaction, and to some extent restored hispeace of mind. He was pleased to think that, even in such an importantcrisis in life, no one would be able to say that he had not acted inaccordance with the principles of that religion whose banner he hadalways held aloft amid the general coolness and indifference. As hepondered over subsequent developments, Alexey Alexandrovitch did notsee, indeed, why his relations with his wife should not remainpractically the same as before. No doubt, she could never regain hisesteem, but there was not, and there could not be, any sort of reasonthat his existence should be troubled, and that he should suffer becauseshe was a bad and faithless wife. "Yes, time will pass; time, whicharranges all things, and the old relations will be reestablished,"Alexey Alexandrovitch told himself; "so far reestablished, that is, thatI shall not be sensible of a break in the continuity of my life. She isbound to be unhappy, but I am not to blame, and so I cannot be unhappy."


Chapter 14

As he neared Petersburg, Alexey Alexandrovitch not only adhered entirelyto his decision, but was even composing in his head the letter he wouldwrite to his wife. Going into the porter’s room, Alexey Alexandrovitchglanced at the letters and papers brought from his office, and directedthat they should be brought to him in his study.
"The horses can be taken out and I will see no one," he said in answerto the porter, with a certain pleasure, indicative of his agreeableframe of mind, emphasizing the words, "see no one."
In his study Alexey Alexandrovitch walked up and down twice, and stoppedat an immense writing-table, on which six candles had already beenlighted by the valet who had preceded him. He cracked his knuckles andsat down, sorting out his writing appurtenances. Putting his elbows onthe table, he bent his head on one side, thought a minute, and began towrite, without pausing for a second. He wrote without using any form ofaddress to her, and wrote in French, making use of the plural "_vous_,"which has not the same note of coldness as the corresponding Russianform.
    "At our last conversation, I notified you of my intention to    communicate to you my decision in regard to the subject of that    conversation. Having carefully considered everything, I am    writing now with the object of fulfilling that promise. My    decision is as follows. Whatever your conduct may have been, I    do not consider myself justified in breaking the ties in which    we are bound by a Higher Power. The family cannot be broken up    by a whim, a caprice, or even by the sin of one of the partners    in the marriage, and our life must go on as it has done in the    past. This is essential for me, for you, and for our son. I am    fully persuaded that you have repented and do repent of what has    called forth the present letter, and that you will cooperate    with me in eradicating the cause of our estrangement, and    forgetting the past. In the contrary event, you can conjecture    what awaits you and your son. All this I hope to discuss more in    detail in a personal interview. As the season is drawing to a    close, I would beg you to return to Petersburg as quickly as    possible, not later than Tuesday. All necessary preparations    shall be made for your arrival here. I beg you to note that I    attach particular significance to compliance with this request.
                                                          A. Karenin
    "P.S.—I enclose the money which may be needed for your    expenses."
He read the letter through and felt pleased with it, and especially thathe had remembered to enclose money: there was not a harsh word, not areproach in it, nor was there undue indulgence. Most of all, it was agolden bridge for return. Folding the letter and smoothing it with amassive ivory knife, and putting it in an envelope with the money, herang the bell with the gratification it always afforded him to use thewell arranged appointments of his writing-table.
"Give this to the courier to be delivered to Anna Arkadyevna tomorrow atthe summer villa," he said, getting up.
"Certainly, your excellency; tea to be served in the study?"
Alexey Alexandrovitch ordered tea to be brought to the study, andplaying with the massive paper-knife, he moved to his easy chair, nearwhich there had been placed ready for him a lamp and the French work onEgyptian hieroglyphics that he had begun. Over the easy chair there hungin a gold frame an oval portrait of Anna, a fine painting by acelebrated artist. Alexey Alexandrovitch glanced at it. The unfathomableeyes gazed ironically and insolently at him. Insufferably insolent andchallenging was the effect in Alexey Alexandrovitch’s eyes of the blacklace about the head, admirably touched in by the painter, the black hairand handsome white hand with one finger lifted, covered with rings.After looking at the portrait for a minute, Alexey Alexandrovitchshuddered so that his lips quivered and he uttered the sound "brrr," andturned away. He made haste to sit down in his easy chair and opened thebook. He tried to read, but he could not revive the very vivid interesthe had felt before in Egyptian hieroglyphics. He looked at the book andthought of something else. He thought not of his wife, but of acomplication that had arisen in his official life, which at the timeconstituted the chief interest of it. He felt that he had penetratedmore deeply than ever before into this intricate affair, and that he hadoriginated a leading idea—he could say it withoutself-flattery—calculated to clear up the whole business, to strengthenhim in his official career, to discomfit his enemies, and thereby to beof the greatest benefit to the government. Directly the servant had setthe tea and left the room, Alexey Alexandrovitch got up and went to thewriting-table. Moving into the middle of the table a portfolio ofpapers, with a scarcely perceptible smile of self-satisfaction, he tooka pencil from a rack and plunged into the perusal of a complex reportrelating to the present complication. The complication was of thisnature: Alexey Alexandrovitch’s characteristic quality as a politician,that special individual qualification that every rising functionarypossesses, the qualification that with his unflagging ambition, hisreserve, his honesty, and with his self-confidence had made his career,was his contempt for red tape, his cutting down of correspondence, hisdirect contact, wherever possible, with the living fact, and hiseconomy. It happened that the famous Commission of the 2nd of June hadset on foot an inquiry into the irrigation of lands in the Zaraiskyprovince, which fell under Alexey Alexandrovitch’s department, and was aglaring example of fruitless expenditure and paper reforms. AlexeyAlexandrovitch was aware of the truth of this. The irrigation of theselands in the Zaraisky province had been initiated by the predecessor ofAlexey Alexandrovitch’s predecessor. And vast sums of money had actuallybeen spent and were still being spent on this business, and utterlyunproductively, and the whole business could obviously lead to nothingwhatever. Alexey Alexandrovitch had perceived this at once on enteringoffice, and would have liked to lay hands on the Board of Irrigation.But at first, when he did not yet feel secure in his position, he knewit would affect too many interests, and would be injudicious. Later onhe had been engrossed in other questions, and had simply forgotten theBoard of Irrigation. It went of itself, like all such boards, by themere force of inertia. (Many people gained their livelihood by the Boardof Irrigation, especially one highly conscientious and musical family:all the daughters played on stringed instruments, and AlexeyAlexandrovitch knew the family and had stood godfather to one of theelder daughters.) The raising of this question by a hostile departmentwas in Alexey Alexandrovitch’s opinion a dishonorable proceeding, seeingthat in every department there were things similar and worse, which noone inquired into, for well-known reasons of official etiquette.However, now that the glove had been thrown down to him, he had boldlypicked it up and demanded the appointment of a special commission toinvestigate and verify the working of the Board of Irrigation of thelands in the Zaraisky province. But in compensation he gave no quarterto the enemy either. He demanded the appointment of another specialcommission to inquire into the question of the Native TribesOrganization Committee. The question of the Native Tribes had beenbrought up incidentally in the Commission of the 2nd of June, and hadbeen pressed forward actively by Alexey Alexandrovitch as one admittingof no delay on account of the deplorable condition of the native tribes.In the commission this question had been a ground of contention betweenseveral departments. The department hostile to Alexey Alexandrovitchproved that the condition of the native tribes was exceedinglyflourishing, that the proposed reconstruction might be the ruin of theirprosperity, and that if there were anything wrong, it arose mainly fromthe failure on the part of Alexey Alexandrovitch’s department to carryout the measures prescribed by law. Now Alexey Alexandrovitch intendedto demand: First, that a new commission should be formed which should beempowered to investigate the condition of the native tribes on the spot;secondly, if it should appear that the condition of the native tribesactually was such as it appeared to be from the official documents inthe hands of the committee, that another new scientific commissionshould be appointed to investigate the deplorable condition of thenative tribes from the—(1) political, (2) administrative, (3) economic,(4) ethnographical, (5) material, and (6) religious points of view;thirdly, that evidence should be required from the rival department ofthe measures that had been taken during the last ten years by thatdepartment for averting the disastrous conditions in which the nativetribes were now placed; and fourthly and finally, that that departmentexplain why it had, as appeared from the evidence before the committee,from No. 17,015 and 18,038, from December 5, 1863, and June 7, 1864,acted in direct contravention of the intent of the law T... Act 18, andthe note to Act 36. A flash of eagerness suffused the face of AlexeyAlexandrovitch as he rapidly wrote out a synopsis of these ideas for hisown benefit. Having filled a sheet of paper, he got up, rang, and sent anote to the chief secretary of his department to look up certainnecessary facts for him. Getting up and walking about the room, heglanced again at the portrait, frowned, and smiled contemptuously. Afterreading a little more of the book on Egyptian hieroglyphics, andrenewing his interest in it, Alexey Alexandrovitch went to bed at eleveno’clock, and recollecting as he lay in bed the incident with his wife,he saw it now in by no means such a gloomy light.


Chapter 15

Though Anna had obstinately and with exasperation contradicted Vronskywhen he told her their position was impossible, at the bottom of herheart she regarded her own position as false and dishonorable, and shelonged with her whole soul to change it. On the way home from the racesshe had told her husband the truth in a moment of excitement, and inspite of the agony she had suffered in doing so, she was glad of it.After her husband had left her, she told herself that she was glad, thatnow everything was made clear, and at least there would be no more lyingand deception. It seemed to her beyond doubt that her position was nowmade clear forever. It might be bad, this new position, but it would beclear; there would be no indefiniteness or falsehood about it. The painshe had caused herself and her husband in uttering those words would berewarded now by everything being made clear, she thought. That eveningshe saw Vronsky, but she did not tell him of what had passed between herand her husband, though, to make the position definite, it was necessaryto tell him.
When she woke up next morning the first thing that rose to her mind waswhat she had said to her husband, and those words seemed to her so awfulthat she could not conceive now how she could have brought herself toutter those strange, coarse words, and could not imagine what would comeof it. But the words were spoken, and Alexey Alexandrovitch had goneaway without saying anything. "I saw Vronsky and did not tell him. Atthe very instant he was going away I would have turned him back and toldhim, but I changed my mind, because it was strange that I had not toldhim the first minute. Why was it I wanted to tell him and did not tellhim?" And in answer to this question a burning blush of shame spreadover her face. She knew what had kept her from it, she knew that she hadbeen ashamed. Her position, which had seemed to her simplified the nightbefore, suddenly struck her now as not only not simple, but asabsolutely hopeless. She felt terrified at the disgrace, of which shehad not ever thought before. Directly she thought of what her husbandwould do, the most terrible ideas came to her mind. She had a vision ofbeing turned out of the house, of her shame being proclaimed to all theworld. She asked herself where she should go when she was turned out ofthe house, and she could not find an answer.
When she thought of Vronsky, it seemed to her that he did not love her,that he was already beginning to be tired of her, that she could notoffer herself to him, and she felt bitter against him for it. It seemedto her that the words that she had spoken to her husband, and hadcontinually repeated in her imagination, she had said to everyone, andeveryone had heard them. She could not bring herself to look those ofher own household in the face. She could not bring herself to call hermaid, and still less go downstairs and see her son and his governess.
The maid, who had been listening at her door for a long while, came intoher room of her own accord. Anna glanced inquiringly into her face, andblushed with a scared look. The maid begged her pardon for coming in,saying that she had fancied the bell rang. She brought her clothes and anote. The note was from Betsy. Betsy reminded her that Liza Merkalovaand Baroness Shtoltz were coming to play croquet with her that morningwith their adorers, Kaluzhsky and old Stremov. "Come, if only as a studyin morals. I shall expect you," she finished.
Anna read the note and heaved a deep sigh.
"Nothing, I need nothing," she said to Annushka, who was rearranging thebottles and brushes on the dressing table. "You can go. I’ll dress atonce and come down. I need nothing."
Annushka went out, but Anna did not begin dressing, and sat in the sameposition, her head and hands hanging listlessly, and every now and thenshe shivered all over, seemed as though she would make some gesture,utter some word, and sank back into lifelessness again. She repeatedcontinually, "My God! my God!" But neither "God" nor "my" had anymeaning to her. The idea of seeking help in her difficulty in religionwas as remote from her as seeking help from Alexey Alexandrovitchhimself, although she had never had doubts of the faith in which she hadbeen brought up. She knew that the support of religion was possible onlyupon condition of renouncing what made up for her the whole meaning oflife. She was not simply miserable, she began to feel alarm at the newspiritual condition, never experienced before, in which she foundherself. She felt as though everything were beginning to be double inher soul, just as objects sometimes appear double to over-tired eyes.She hardly knew at times what it was she feared, and what she hoped for.Whether she feared or desired what had happened, or what was going tohappen, and exactly what she longed for, she could not have said.
"Ah, what am I doing!" she said to herself, feeling a sudden thrill ofpain in both sides of her head. When she came to herself, she saw thatshe was holding her hair in both hands, each side of her temples, andpulling it. She jumped up, and began walking about.
"The coffee is ready, and mademoiselle and Seryozha are waiting," saidAnnushka, coming back again and finding Anna in the same position.
"Seryozha? What about Seryozha?" Anna asked, with sudden eagerness,recollecting her son’s existence for the first time that morning.
"He’s been naughty, I think," answered Annushka with a smile.
"In what way?"
"Some peaches were lying on the table in the corner room. I think heslipped in and ate one of them on the sly."
The recollection of her son suddenly roused Anna from the helplesscondition in which she found herself. She recalled the partly sincere,though greatly exaggerated, rôle of the mother living for her child,which she had taken up of late years, and she felt with joy that in theplight in which she found herself she had a support, quite apart fromher relation to her husband or to Vronsky. This support was her son. Inwhatever position she might be placed, she could not lose her son. Herhusband might put her to shame and turn her out, Vronsky might grow coldto her and go on living his own life apart (she thought of him againwith bitterness and reproach); she could not leave her son. She had anaim in life. And she must act; act to secure this relation to her son,so that he might not be taken from her. Quickly indeed, as quickly aspossible, she must take action before he was taken from her. She musttake her son and go away. Here was the one thing she had to do now. Sheneeded consolation. She must be calm, and get out of this insufferableposition. The thought of immediate action binding her to her son, ofgoing away somewhere with him, gave her this consolation.
She dressed quickly, went downstairs, and with resolute steps walkedinto the drawing room, where she found, as usual, waiting for her, thecoffee, Seryozha, and his governess. Seryozha, all in white, with hisback and head bent, was standing at a table under a looking-glass, andwith an expression of intense concentration which she knew well, and inwhich he resembled his father, he was doing something to the flowers hecarried.
The governess had a particularly severe expression. Seryozha screamedshrilly, as he often did, "Ah, mamma!" and stopped, hesitating whetherto go to greet his mother and put down the flowers, or to finish makingthe wreath and go with the flowers.
The governess, after saying good-morning, began a long and detailedaccount of Seryozha’s naughtiness, but Anna did not hear her; she wasconsidering whether she would take her with her or not. "No, I won’ttake her," she decided. "I’ll go alone with my child."
"Yes, it’s very wrong," said Anna, and taking her son by the shouldershe looked at him, not severely, but with a timid glance that bewilderedand delighted the boy, and she kissed him. "Leave him to me," she saidto the astonished governess, and not letting go of her son, she sat downat the table, where coffee was set ready for her.
"Mamma! I ... I ... didn’t..." he said, trying to make out from herexpression what was in store for him in regard to the peaches.
"Seryozha," she said, as soon as the governess had left the room, "thatwas wrong, but you’ll never do it again, will you?... You love me?"
She felt that the tears were coming into her eyes. "Can I help lovinghim?" she said to herself, looking deeply into his scared and at thesame time delighted eyes. "And can he ever join his father in punishingme? Is it possible he will not feel for me?" Tears were already flowingdown her face, and to hide them she got up abruptly and almost ran outon to the terrace.
After the thunder showers of the last few days, cold, bright weather hadset in. The air was cold in the bright sun that filtered through thefreshly washed leaves.
She shivered, both from the cold and from the inward horror which hadclutched her with fresh force in the open air.
"Run along, run along to Mariette," she said to Seryozha, who hadfollowed her out, and she began walking up and down on the straw mattingof the terrace. "Can it be that they won’t forgive me, won’t understandhow it all couldn’t be helped?" she said to herself.
Standing still, and looking at the tops of the aspen trees waving in thewind, with their freshly washed, brightly shining leaves in the coldsunshine, she knew that they would not forgive her, that everyone andeverything would be merciless to her now as was that sky, that green.And again she felt that everything was split in two in her soul. "Imustn’t, mustn’t think," she said to herself. "I must get ready. To gowhere? When? Whom to take with me? Yes, to Moscow by the evening train.Annushka and Seryozha, and only the most necessary things. But first Imust write to them both." She went quickly indoors into her boudoir, satdown at the table, and wrote to her husband:—"After what has happened, Icannot remain any longer in your house. I am going away, and taking myson with me. I don’t know the law, and so I don’t know with which of theparents the son should remain; but I take him with me because I cannotlive without him. Be generous, leave him to me."
Up to this point she wrote rapidly and naturally, but the appeal to hisgenerosity, a quality she did not recognize in him, and the necessity ofwinding up the letter with something touching, pulled her up. "Of myfault and my remorse I cannot speak, because..."
She stopped again, finding no connection in her ideas. "No," she said toherself, "there’s no need of anything," and tearing up the letter, shewrote it again, leaving out the allusion to generosity, and sealed itup.
Another letter had to be written to Vronsky. "I have told my husband,"she wrote, and she sat a long while unable to write more. It was socoarse, so unfeminine. "And what more am I to write to him?" she said toherself. Again a flush of shame spread over her face; she recalled hiscomposure, and a feeling of anger against him impelled her to tear thesheet with the phrase she had written into tiny bits. "No need ofanything," she said to herself, and closing her blotting-case she wentupstairs, told the governess and the servants that she was going thatday to Moscow, and at once set to work to pack up her things.


Chapter 16

All the rooms of the summer villa were full of porters, gardeners, andfootmen going to and fro carrying out things. Cupboards and chests wereopen; twice they had sent to the shop for cord; pieces of newspaper weretossing about on the floor. Two trunks, some bags and strapped-up rugs,had been carried down into the hall. The carriage and two hired cabswere waiting at the steps. Anna, forgetting her inward agitation in thework of packing, was standing at a table in her boudoir, packing hertraveling bag, when Annushka called her attention to the rattle of somecarriage driving up. Anna looked out of the window and saw AlexeyAlexandrovitch’s courier on the steps, ringing at the front door bell.
"Run and find out what it is," she said, and with a calm sense of beingprepared for anything, she sat down in a low chair, folding her hands onher knees. A footman brought in a thick packet directed in AlexeyAlexandrovitch’s hand.
"The courier has orders to wait for an answer," he said.
"Very well," she said, and as soon as he had left the room she tore openthe letter with trembling fingers. A roll of unfolded notes done up in awrapper fell out of it. She disengaged the letter and began reading itat the end. "Preparations shall be made for your arrival here ... Iattach particular significance to compliance..." she read. She ran on,then back, read it all through, and once more read the letter allthrough again from the beginning. When she had finished, she felt thatshe was cold all over, and that a fearful calamity, such as she had notexpected, had burst upon her.
In the morning she had regretted that she had spoken to her husband, andwished for nothing so much as that those words could be unspoken. Andhere this letter regarded them as unspoken, and gave her what she hadwanted. But now this letter seemed to her more awful than anything shehad been able to conceive.
"He’s right!" she said; "of course, he’s always right; he’s a Christian,he’s generous! Yes, vile, base creature! And no one understands itexcept me, and no one ever will; and I can’t explain it. They say he’sso religious, so high-principled, so upright, so clever; but they don’tsee what I’ve seen. They don’t know how he has crushed my life for eightyears, crushed everything that was living in me—he has not once eventhought that I’m a live woman who must have love. They don’t know how atevery step he’s humiliated me, and been just as pleased with himself.Haven’t I striven, striven with all my strength, to find something togive meaning to my life? Haven’t I struggled to love him, to love my sonwhen I could not love my husband? But the time came when I knew that Icouldn’t cheat myself any longer, that I was alive, that I was not toblame, that God has made me so that I must love and live. And now whatdoes he do? If he’d killed me, if he’d killed him, I could have borneanything, I could have forgiven anything; but, no, he.... How was it Ididn’t guess what he would do? He’s doing just what’s characteristic ofhis mean character. He’ll keep himself in the right, while me, in myruin, he’ll drive still lower to worse ruin yet...."
She recalled the words from the letter. "You can conjecture what awaitsyou and your son...." "That’s a threat to take away my child, and mostlikely by their stupid law he can. But I know very well why he says it.He doesn’t believe even in my love for my child, or he despises it (justas he always used to ridicule it). He despises that feeling in me, buthe knows that I won’t abandon my child, that I can’t abandon my child,that there could be no life for me without my child, even with him whomI love; but that if I abandoned my child and ran away from him, I shouldbe acting like the most infamous, basest of women. He knows that, andknows that I am incapable of doing that."
She recalled another sentence in the letter. "Our life must go on as ithas done in the past...." "That life was miserable enough in the olddays; it has been awful of late. What will it be now? And he knows allthat; he knows that I can’t repent that I breathe, that I love; he knowsthat it can lead to nothing but lying and deceit; but he wants to go ontorturing me. I know him; I know that he’s at home and is happy indeceit, like a fish swimming in the water. No, I won’t give him thathappiness. I’ll break through the spiderweb of lies in which he wants tocatch me, come what may. Anything’s better than lying and deceit.
"But how? My God! my God! Was ever a woman so miserable as I am?..."
"No; I will break through it, I will break through it!" she cried,jumping up and keeping back her tears. And she went to the writing tableto write him another letter. But at the bottom of her heart she feltthat she was not strong enough to break through anything, that she wasnot strong enough to get out of her old position, however false anddishonorable it might be.
She sat down at the writing table, but instead of writing she claspedher hands on the table, and, laying her head on them, burst into tears,with sobs and heaving breast like a child crying. She was weeping thather dream of her position being made clear and definite had beenannihilated forever. She knew beforehand that everything would go on inthe old way, and far worse, indeed, than in the old way. She felt thatthe position in the world that she enjoyed, and that had seemed to herof so little consequence in the morning, that this position was preciousto her, that she would not have the strength to exchange it for theshameful position of a woman who has abandoned husband and child to joinher lover; that however much she might struggle, she could not bestronger than herself. She would never know freedom in love, but wouldremain forever a guilty wife, with the menace of detection hanging overher at every instant; deceiving her husband for the sake of a shamefulconnection with a man living apart and away from her, whose life shecould never share. She knew that this was how it would be, and at thesame time it was so awful that she could not even conceive what it wouldend in. And she cried without restraint, as children cry when they arepunished.
The sound of the footman’s steps forced her to rouse herself, and,hiding her face from him, she pretended to be writing.
"The courier asks if there’s an answer," the footman announced.
"An answer? Yes," said Anna. "Let him wait. I’ll ring."
"What can I write?" she thought. "What can I decide upon alone? What doI know? What do I want? What is there I care for?" Again she felt thather soul was beginning to be split in two. She was terrified again atthis feeling, and clutched at the first pretext for doing somethingwhich might divert her thoughts from herself. "I ought to see Alexey"(so she called Vronsky in her thoughts); "no one but he can tell me whatI ought to do. I’ll go to Betsy’s, perhaps I shall see him there," shesaid to herself, completely forgetting that when she had told him theday before that she was not going to Princess Tverskaya’s, he had saidthat in that case he should not go either. She went up to the table,wrote to her husband, "I have received your letter.—A."; and, ringingthe bell, gave it to the footman.
"We are not going," she said to Annushka, as she came in.
"Not going at all?"
"No; don’t unpack till tomorrow, and let the carriage wait. I’m going tothe princess’s."
"Which dress am I to get ready?"


Chapter 17

The croquet party to which the Princess Tverskaya had invited Anna wasto consist of two ladies and their adorers. These two ladies were thechief representatives of a select new Petersburg circle, nicknamed, inimitation of some imitation, _les sept merveilles du monde_. Theseladies belonged to a circle which, though of the highest society, wasutterly hostile to that in which Anna moved. Moreover, Stremov, one ofthe most influential people in Petersburg, and the elderly admirer ofLiza Merkalova, was Alexey Alexandrovitch’s enemy in the politicalworld. From all these considerations Anna had not meant to go, and thehints in Princess Tverskaya’s note referred to her refusal. But now Annawas eager to go, in the hope of seeing Vronsky.
Anna arrived at Princess Tverskaya’s earlier than the other guests.
At the same moment as she entered, Vronsky’s footman, with side-whiskerscombed out like a _Kammerjunker_, went in too. He stopped at the door,and, taking off his cap, let her pass. Anna recognized him, and onlythen recalled that Vronsky had told her the day before that he would notcome. Most likely he was sending a note to say so.
As she took off her outer garment in the hall, she heard the footman,pronouncing his "r’s" even like a _Kammerjunker_, say, "From the countfor the princess," and hand the note.
She longed to question him as to where his master was. She longed toturn back and send him a letter to come and see her, or to go herself tosee him. But neither the first nor the second nor the third course waspossible. Already she heard bells ringing to announce her arrival aheadof her, and Princess Tverskaya’s footman was standing at the open doorwaiting for her to go forward into the inner rooms.
"The princess is in the garden; they will inform her immediately. Wouldyou be pleased to walk into the garden?" announced another footman inanother room.
The position of uncertainty, of indecision, was still the same as athome—worse, in fact, since it was impossible to take any step,impossible to see Vronsky, and she had to remain here among outsiders,in company so uncongenial to her present mood. But she was wearing adress that she knew suited her. She was not alone; all around was thatluxurious setting of idleness that she was used to, and she felt lesswretched than at home. She was not forced to think what she was to do.Everything would be done of itself. On meeting Betsy coming towards herin a white gown that struck her by its elegance, Anna smiled at her justas she always did. Princess Tverskaya was walking with Tushkevitch and ayoung lady, a relation, who, to the great joy of her parents in theprovinces, was spending the summer with the fashionable princess.
There was probably something unusual about Anna, for Betsy noticed it atonce.
"I slept badly," answered Anna, looking intently at the footman who cameto meet them, and, as she supposed, brought Vronsky’s note.
"How glad I am you’ve come!" said Betsy. "I’m tired, and was justlonging to have some tea before they come. You might go"—she turned toTushkevitch—"with Masha, and try the croquet ground over there wherethey’ve been cutting it. We shall have time to talk a little over tea;we’ll have a cozy chat, eh?" she said in English to Anna, with a smile,pressing the hand with which she held a parasol.
"Yes, especially as I can’t stay very long with you. I’m forced to go onto old Madame Vrede. I’ve been promising to go for a century," saidAnna, to whom lying, alien as it was to her nature, had become notmerely simple and natural in society, but a positive source ofsatisfaction. Why she said this, which she had not thought of a secondbefore, she could not have explained. She had said it simply from thereflection that as Vronsky would not be here, she had better secure herown freedom, and try to see him somehow. But why she had spoken of oldMadame Vrede, whom she had to go and see, as she had to see many otherpeople, she could not have explained; and yet, as it afterwards turnedout, had she contrived the most cunning devices to meet Vronsky, shecould have thought of nothing better.
"No. I’m not going to let you go for anything," answered Betsy, lookingintently into Anna’s face. "Really, if I were not fond of you, I shouldfeel offended. One would think you were afraid my society wouldcompromise you. Tea in the little dining room, please," she said, halfclosing her eyes, as she always did when addressing the footman.
Taking the note from him, she read it.
"Alexey’s playing us false," she said in French; "he writes that hecan’t come," she added in a tone as simple and natural as though itcould never enter her head that Vronsky could mean anything more to Annathan a game of croquet. Anna knew that Betsy knew everything, but,hearing how she spoke of Vronsky before her, she almost felt persuadedfor a minute that she knew nothing.
"Ah!" said Anna indifferently, as though not greatly interested in thematter, and she went on smiling: "How can you or your friends compromiseanyone?"
This playing with words, this hiding of a secret, had a greatfascination for Anna, as, indeed, it has for all women. And it was notthe necessity of concealment, not the aim with which the concealment wascontrived, but the process of concealment itself which attracted her.
"I can’t be more Catholic than the Pope," she said. "Stremov and LizaMerkalova, why, they’re the cream of the cream of society. Besides,they’re received everywhere, and _I_"—she laid special stress on theI—"have never been strict and intolerant. It’s simply that I haven’t thetime."
"No; you don’t care, perhaps, to meet Stremov? Let him and AlexeyAlexandrovitch tilt at each other in the committee—that’s no affair ofours. But in the world, he’s the most amiable man I know, and a devotedcroquet player. You shall see. And, in spite of his absurd position asLiza’s lovesick swain at his age, you ought to see how he carries offthe absurd position. He’s very nice. Sappho Shtoltz you don’t know? Oh,that’s a new type, quite new."
Betsy said all this, and, at the same time, from her good-humored,shrewd glance, Anna felt that she partly guessed her plight, and washatching something for her benefit. They were in the little boudoir.
"I must write to Alexey though," and Betsy sat down to the table,scribbled a few lines, and put the note in an envelope.
"I’m telling him to come to dinner. I’ve one lady extra to dinner withme, and no man to take her in. Look what I’ve said, will that persuadehim? Excuse me, I must leave you for a minute. Would you seal it up,please, and send it off?" she said from the door; "I have to give somedirections."
Without a moment’s thought, Anna sat down to the table with Betsy’sletter, and, without reading it, wrote below: "It’s essential for me tosee you. Come to the Vrede garden. I shall be there at six o’clock." Shesealed it up, and, Betsy coming back, in her presence handed the note tobe taken.
At tea, which was brought them on a little tea-table in the cool littledrawing room, the cozy chat promised by Princess Tverskaya before thearrival of her visitors really did come off between the two women. Theycriticized the people they were expecting, and the conversation fellupon Liza Merkalova.
"She’s very sweet, and I always liked her," said Anna.
"You ought to like her. She raves about you. Yesterday she came up to meafter the races and was in despair at not finding you. She says you’re areal heroine of romance, and that if she were a man she would do allsorts of mad things for your sake. Stremov says she does that as it is."
"But do tell me, please, I never could make it out," said Anna, afterbeing silent for some time, speaking in a tone that showed she was notasking an idle question, but that what she was asking was of moreimportance to her than it should have been; "do tell me, please, whatare her relations with Prince Kaluzhsky, Mishka, as he’s called? I’vemet them so little. What does it mean?"
Betsy smiled with her eyes, and looked intently at Anna.
"It’s a new manner," she said. "They’ve all adopted that manner. They’veflung their caps over the windmills. But there are ways and ways offlinging them."
"Yes, but what are her relations precisely with Kaluzhsky?"
Betsy broke into unexpectedly mirthful and irrepressible laughter, athing which rarely happened with her.
"You’re encroaching on Princess Myakaya’s special domain now. That’s thequestion of an _enfant terrible_," and Betsy obviously tried to restrainherself, but could not, and went off into peals of that infectiouslaughter that people laugh who do not laugh often. "You’d better askthem," she brought out, between tears of laughter.
"No; you laugh," said Anna, laughing too in spite of herself, "but Inever could understand it. I can’t understand the husband’s rôle in it."
"The husband? Liza Merkalova’s husband carries her shawl, and is alwaysready to be of use. But anything more than that in reality, no one caresto inquire. You know in decent society one doesn’t talk or think even ofcertain details of the toilet. That’s how it is with this."
"Will you be at Madame Rolandak’s fête?" asked Anna, to change theconversation.
"I don’t think so," answered Betsy, and, without looking at her friend,she began filling the little transparent cups with fragrant tea. Puttinga cup before Anna, she took out a cigarette, and, fitting it into asilver holder, she lighted it.
"It’s like this, you see: I’m in a fortunate position," she began, quiteserious now, as she took up her cup. "I understand you, and I understandLiza. Liza now is one of those naïve natures that, like children, don’tknow what’s good and what’s bad. Anyway, she didn’t comprehend it whenshe was very young. And now she’s aware that the lack of comprehensionsuits her. Now, perhaps, she doesn’t know on purpose," said Betsy, witha subtle smile. "But, anyway, it suits her. The very same thing, don’tyou see, may be looked at tragically, and turned into a misery, or itmay be looked at simply and even humorously. Possibly you are inclinedto look at things too tragically."
"How I should like to know other people just as I know myself!" saidAnna, seriously and dreamily. "Am I worse than other people, or better?I think I’m worse."
"_Enfant terrible, enfant terrible!_" repeated Betsy. "But here theyare."


Chapter 18

They heard the sound of steps and a man’s voice, then a woman’s voiceand laughter, and immediately thereafter there walked in the expectedguests: Sappho Shtoltz, and a young man beaming with excess of health,the so-called Vaska. It was evident that ample supplies of beefsteak,truffles, and Burgundy never failed to reach him at the fitting hour.Vaska bowed to the two ladies, and glanced at them, but only for onesecond. He walked after Sappho into the drawing-room, and followed herabout as though he were chained to her, keeping his sparkling eyes fixedon her as though he wanted to eat her. Sappho Shtoltz was a blondebeauty with black eyes. She walked with smart little steps inhigh-heeled shoes, and shook hands with the ladies vigorously like aman.
Anna had never met this new star of fashion, and was struck by herbeauty, the exaggerated extreme to which her dress was carried, and theboldness of her manners. On her head there was such a superstructure ofsoft, golden hair—her own and false mixed—that her head was equal insize to the elegantly rounded bust, of which so much was exposed infront. The impulsive abruptness of her movements was such that at everystep the lines of her knees and the upper part of her legs weredistinctly marked under her dress, and the question involuntarily roseto the mind where in the undulating, piled-up mountain of material atthe back the real body of the woman, so small and slender, so naked infront, and so hidden behind and below, really came to an end.
Betsy made haste to introduce her to Anna.
"Only fancy, we all but ran over two soldiers," she began telling themat once, using her eyes, smiling and twitching away her tail, which sheflung back at one stroke all on one side. "I drove here with Vaska....Ah, to be sure, you don’t know each other." And mentioning his surnameshe introduced the young man, and reddening a little, broke into aringing laugh at her mistake—that is, at her having called him Vaska toa stranger. Vaska bowed once more to Anna, but he said nothing to her.He addressed Sappho: "You’ve lost your bet. We got here first. Pay up,"said he, smiling.
Sappho laughed still more festively.
"Not just now," said she.
"Oh, all right, I’ll have it later."
"Very well, very well. Oh, yes." She turned suddenly to Princess Betsy:"I am a nice person ... I positively forgot it ... I’ve brought you avisitor. And here he comes." The unexpected young visitor, whom Sapphohad invited, and whom she had forgotten, was, however, a personage ofsuch consequence that, in spite of his youth, both the ladies rose onhis entrance.
He was a new admirer of Sappho’s. He now dogged her footsteps, likeVaska.
Soon after Prince Kaluzhsky arrived, and Liza Merkalova with Stremov.Liza Merkalova was a thin brunette, with an Oriental, languid type offace, and—as everyone used to say—exquisite enigmatic eyes. The tone ofher dark dress (Anna immediately observed and appreciated the fact) wasin perfect harmony with her style of beauty. Liza was as soft andenervated as Sappho was smart and abrupt.
But to Anna’s taste Liza was far more attractive. Betsy had said to Annathat she had adopted the pose of an innocent child, but when Anna sawher, she felt that this was not the truth. She really was both innocentand corrupt, but a sweet and passive woman. It is true that her tone wasthe same as Sappho’s; that like Sappho, she had two men, one young andone old, tacked onto her, and devouring her with their eyes. But therewas something in her higher than what surrounded her. There was in herthe glow of the real diamond among glass imitations. This glow shone outin her exquisite, truly enigmatic eyes. The weary, and at the same timepassionate, glance of those eyes, encircled by dark rings, impressed oneby its perfect sincerity. Everyone looking into those eyes fancied heknew her wholly, and knowing her, could not but love her. At the sightof Anna, her whole face lighted up at once with a smile of delight.
"Ah, how glad I am to see you!" she said, going up to her. "Yesterday atthe races all I wanted was to get to you, but you’d gone away. I did sowant to see you, yesterday especially. Wasn’t it awful?" she said,looking at Anna with eyes that seemed to lay bare all her soul.
"Yes; I had no idea it would be so thrilling," said Anna, blushing.
The company got up at this moment to go into the garden.
"I’m not going," said Liza, smiling and settling herself close to Anna."You won’t go either, will you? Who wants to play croquet?"
"Oh, I like it," said Anna.
"There, how do you manage never to be bored by things? It’s delightfulto look at you. You’re alive, but I’m bored."
"How can you be bored? Why, you live in the liveliest set inPetersburg," said Anna.
"Possibly the people who are not of our set are even more bored; butwe—I certainly—are not happy, but awfully, awfully bored."
Sappho smoking a cigarette went off into the garden with the two youngmen. Betsy and Stremov remained at the tea-table.
"What, bored!" said Betsy. "Sappho says they did enjoy themselvestremendously at your house last night."
"Ah, how dreary it all was!" said Liza Merkalova. "We all drove back tomy place after the races. And always the same people, always the same.Always the same thing. We lounged about on sofas all the evening. Whatis there to enjoy in that? No; do tell me how you manage never to bebored?" she said, addressing Anna again. "One has but to look at you andone sees, here’s a woman who may be happy or unhappy, but isn’t bored.Tell me how you do it?"
"I do nothing," answered Anna, blushing at these searching questions.
"That’s the best way," Stremov put in. Stremov was a man of fifty,partly gray, but still vigorous-looking, very ugly, but with acharacteristic and intelligent face. Liza Merkalova was his wife’sniece, and he spent all his leisure hours with her. On meeting AnnaKarenina, as he was Alexey Alexandrovitch’s enemy in the government, hetried, like a shrewd man and a man of the world, to be particularlycordial with her, the wife of his enemy.
"‘Nothing,’" he put in with a subtle smile, "that’s the very best way. Itold you long ago," he said, turning to Liza Merkalova, "that if youdon’t want to be bored, you mustn’t think you’re going to be bored. It’sjust as you mustn’t be afraid of not being able to fall asleep, ifyou’re afraid of sleeplessness. That’s just what Anna Arkadyevna hasjust said."
"I should be very glad if I had said it, for it’s not only clever buttrue," said Anna, smiling.
"No, do tell me why it is one can’t go to sleep, and one can’t helpbeing bored?"
"To sleep well one ought to work, and to enjoy oneself one ought to worktoo."
"What am I to work for when my work is no use to anybody? And I can’tand won’t knowingly make a pretense about it."
"You’re incorrigible," said Stremov, not looking at her, and he spokeagain to Anna. As he rarely met Anna, he could say nothing butcommonplaces to her, but he said those commonplaces as to when she wasreturning to Petersburg, and how fond Countess Lidia Ivanovna was ofher, with an expression which suggested that he longed with his wholesoul to please her and show his regard for her and even more than that.
Tushkevitch came in, announcing that the party were awaiting the otherplayers to begin croquet.
"No, don’t go away, please don’t," pleaded Liza Merkalova, hearing thatAnna was going. Stremov joined in her entreaties.
"It’s too violent a transition," he said, "to go from such company toold Madame Vrede. And besides, you will only give her a chance fortalking scandal, while here you arouse none but such different feelingsof the highest and most opposite kind," he said to her.
Anna pondered for an instant in uncertainty. This shrewd man’sflattering words, the naïve, childlike affection shown her by LizaMerkalova, and all the social atmosphere she was used to,—it was all soeasy, and what was in store for her was so difficult, that she was for aminute in uncertainty whether to remain, whether to put off a littlelonger the painful moment of explanation. But remembering what was instore for her alone at home, if she did not come to some decision,remembering that gesture—terrible even in memory—when she had clutchedher hair in both hands—she said good-bye and went away.


Chapter 19

In spite of Vronsky’s apparently frivolous life in society, he was a manwho hated irregularity. In early youth in the Corps of Pages, he hadexperienced the humiliation of a refusal, when he had tried, being indifficulties, to borrow money, and since then he had never once puthimself in the same position again.
In order to keep his affairs in some sort of order, he used about fivetimes a year (more or less frequently, according to circumstances) toshut himself up alone and put all his affairs into definite shape. Thishe used to call his day of reckoning or _faire la lessive_.
On waking up the day after the races, Vronsky put on a white linen coat,and without shaving or taking his bath, he distributed about the tablemoneys, bills, and letters, and set to work. Petritsky, who knew he wasill-tempered on such occasions, on waking up and seeing his comrade atthe writing-table, quietly dressed and went out without getting in hisway.
Every man who knows to the minutest details all the complexity of theconditions surrounding him, cannot help imagining that the complexity ofthese conditions, and the difficulty of making them clear, is somethingexceptional and personal, peculiar to himself, and never supposes thatothers are surrounded by just as complicated an array of personalaffairs as he is. So indeed it seemed to Vronsky. And not without inwardpride, and not without reason, he thought that any other man would longago have been in difficulties, would have been forced to somedishonorable course, if he had found himself in such a difficultposition. But Vronsky felt that now especially it was essential for himto clear up and define his position if he were to avoid getting intodifficulties.
What Vronsky attacked first as being the easiest was his pecuniaryposition. Writing out on note paper in his minute hand all that he owed,he added up the amount and found that his debts amounted to seventeenthousand and some odd hundreds, which he left out for the sake ofclearness. Reckoning up his money and his bank book, he found that hehad left one thousand eight hundred roubles, and nothing coming inbefore the New Year. Reckoning over again his list of debts, Vronskycopied it, dividing it into three classes. In the first class he put thedebts which he would have to pay at once, or for which he must in anycase have the money ready so that on demand for payment there could notbe a moment’s delay in paying. Such debts amounted to about fourthousand: one thousand five hundred for a horse, and two thousand fivehundred as surety for a young comrade, Venovsky, who had lost that sumto a cardsharper in Vronsky’s presence. Vronsky had wanted to pay themoney at the time (he had that amount then), but Venovsky and Yashvinhad insisted that they would pay and not Vronsky, who had not played.That was so far well, but Vronsky knew that in this dirty business,though his only share in it was undertaking by word of mouth to besurety for Venovsky, it was absolutely necessary for him to have the twothousand five hundred roubles so as to be able to fling it at theswindler, and have no more words with him. And so for this first andmost important division he must have four thousand roubles. The secondclass—eight thousand roubles—consisted of less important debts. Thesewere principally accounts owing in connection with his race horses, tothe purveyor of oats and hay, the English saddler, and so on. He wouldhave to pay some two thousand roubles on these debts too, in order to bequite free from anxiety. The last class of debts—to shops, to hotels, tohis tailor—were such as need not be considered. So that he needed atleast six thousand roubles for current expenses, and he only had onethousand eight hundred. For a man with one hundred thousand roubles ofrevenue, which was what everyone fixed as Vronsky’s income, such debts,one would suppose, could hardly be embarrassing; but the fact was thathe was far from having one hundred thousand. His father’s immenseproperty, which alone yielded a yearly income of two hundred thousand,was left undivided between the brothers. At the time when the elderbrother, with a mass of debts, married Princess Varya Tchirkova, thedaughter of a Decembrist without any fortune whatever, Alexey had givenup to his elder brother almost the whole income from his father’sestate, reserving for himself only twenty-five thousand a year from it.Alexey had said at the time to his brother that that sum would besufficient for him until he married, which he probably never would do.And his brother, who was in command of one of the most expensiveregiments, and was only just married, could not decline the gift. Hismother, who had her own separate property, had allowed Alexey every yeartwenty thousand in addition to the twenty-five thousand he had reserved,and Alexey had spent it all. Of late his mother, incensed with him onaccount of his love affair and his leaving Moscow, had given up sendinghim the money. And in consequence of this, Vronsky, who had been in thehabit of living on the scale of forty-five thousand a year, having onlyreceived twenty thousand that year, found himself now in difficulties.To get out of these difficulties, he could not apply to his mother formoney. Her last letter, which he had received the day before, hadparticularly exasperated him by the hints in it that she was quite readyto help him to succeed in the world and in the army, but not to lead alife which was a scandal to all good society. His mother’s attempt tobuy him stung him to the quick and made him feel colder than ever toher. But he could not draw back from the generous word when it was onceuttered, even though he felt now, vaguely foreseeing certaineventualities in his intrigue with Madame Karenina, that this generousword had been spoken thoughtlessly, and that even though he were notmarried he might need all the hundred thousand of income. But it wasimpossible to draw back. He had only to recall his brother’s wife, toremember how that sweet, delightful Varya sought, at every convenientopportunity, to remind him that she remembered his generosity andappreciated it, to grasp the impossibility of taking back his gift. Itwas as impossible as beating a woman, stealing, or lying. One thing onlycould and ought to be done, and Vronsky determined upon it without aninstant’s hesitation: to borrow money from a money-lender, ten thousandroubles, a proceeding which presented no difficulty, to cut down hisexpenses generally, and to sell his race horses. Resolving on this, hepromptly wrote a note to Rolandak, who had more than once sent to himwith offers to buy horses from him. Then he sent for the Englishman andthe money-lender, and divided what money he had according to theaccounts he intended to pay. Having finished this business, he wrote acold and cutting answer to his mother. Then he took out of his notebookthree notes of Anna’s, read them again, burned them, and rememberingtheir conversation on the previous day, he sank into meditation.


Chapter 20

Vronsky’s life was particularly happy in that he had a code ofprinciples, which defined with unfailing certitude what he ought andwhat he ought not to do. This code of principles covered only a verysmall circle of contingencies, but then the principles were neverdoubtful, and Vronsky, as he never went outside that circle, had neverhad a moment’s hesitation about doing what he ought to do. Theseprinciples laid down as invariable rules: that one must pay acardsharper, but need not pay a tailor; that one must never tell a lieto a man, but one may to a woman; that one must never cheat anyone, butone may a husband; that one must never pardon an insult, but one maygive one and so on. These principles were possibly not reasonable andnot good, but they were of unfailing certainty, and so long as headhered to them, Vronsky felt that his heart was at peace and he couldhold his head up. Only quite lately in regard to his relations withAnna, Vronsky had begun to feel that his code of principles did notfully cover all possible contingencies, and to foresee in the futuredifficulties and perplexities for which he could find no guiding clue.
His present relation to Anna and to her husband was to his mind clearand simple. It was clearly and precisely defined in the code ofprinciples by which he was guided.
She was an honorable woman who had bestowed her love upon him, and heloved her, and therefore she was in his eyes a woman who had a right tothe same, or even more, respect than a lawful wife. He would have hadhis hand chopped off before he would have allowed himself by a word, bya hint, to humiliate her, or even to fall short of the fullest respect awoman could look for.
His attitude to society, too, was clear. Everyone might know, mightsuspect it, but no one might dare to speak of it. If any did so, he wasready to force all who might speak to be silent and to respect thenon-existent honor of the woman he loved.
His attitude to the husband was the clearest of all. From the momentthat Anna loved Vronsky, he had regarded his own right over her as theone thing unassailable. Her husband was simply a superfluous andtiresome person. No doubt he was in a pitiable position, but how couldthat be helped? The one thing the husband had a right to was to demandsatisfaction with a weapon in his hand, and Vronsky was prepared forthis at any minute.
But of late new inner relations had arisen between him and her, whichfrightened Vronsky by their indefiniteness. Only the day before she hadtold him that she was with child. And he felt that this fact and whatshe expected of him called for something not fully defined in that codeof principles by which he had hitherto steered his course in life. Andhe had been indeed caught unawares, and at the first moment when shespoke to him of her position, his heart had prompted him to beg her toleave her husband. He had said that, but now thinking things over he sawclearly that it would be better to manage to avoid that; and at the sametime, as he told himself so, he was afraid whether it was not wrong.
"If I told her to leave her husband, that must mean uniting her lifewith mine; am I prepared for that? How can I take her away now, when Ihave no money? Supposing I could arrange.... But how can I take her awaywhile I’m in the service? If I say that—I ought to be prepared to do it,that is, I ought to have the money and to retire from the army."
And he grew thoughtful. The question whether to retire from the serviceor not brought him to the other and perhaps the chief though hiddeninterest of his life, of which none knew but he.
Ambition was the old dream of his youth and childhood, a dream which hedid not confess even to himself, though it was so strong that now thispassion was even doing battle with his love. His first steps in theworld and in the service had been successful, but two years before hehad made a great mistake. Anxious to show his independence and toadvance, he had refused a post that had been offered him, hoping thatthis refusal would heighten his value; but it turned out that he hadbeen too bold, and he was passed over. And having, whether he liked ornot, taken up for himself the position of an independent man, he carriedit off with great tact and good sense, behaving as though he bore nogrudge against anyone, did not regard himself as injured in any way, andcared for nothing but to be left alone since he was enjoying himself. Inreality he had ceased to enjoy himself as long ago as the year before,when he went away to Moscow. He felt that this independent attitude of aman who might have done anything, but cared to do nothing, was alreadybeginning to pall, that many people were beginning to fancy that he wasnot really capable of anything but being a straightforward, good-naturedfellow. His connection with Madame Karenina, by creating so muchsensation and attracting general attention, had given him a freshdistinction which soothed his gnawing worm of ambition for a while, buta week before that worm had been roused up again with fresh force. Thefriend of his childhood, a man of the same set, of the same coterie, hiscomrade in the Corps of Pages, Serpuhovskoy, who had left school withhim and had been his rival in class, in gymnastics, in their scrapes andtheir dreams of glory, had come back a few days before from CentralAsia, where he had gained two steps up in rank, and an order rarelybestowed upon generals so young.
As soon as he arrived in Petersburg, people began to talk about him as anewly risen star of the first magnitude. A schoolfellow of Vronsky’s andof the same age, he was a general and was expecting a command, whichmight have influence on the course of political events; while Vronsky,independent and brilliant and beloved by a charming woman though he was,was simply a cavalry captain who was readily allowed to be asindependent as ever he liked. "Of course I don’t envy Serpuhovskoy andnever could envy him; but his advancement shows me that one has only towatch one’s opportunity, and the career of a man like me may be veryrapidly made. Three years ago he was in just the same position as I am.If I retire, I burn my ships. If I remain in the army, I lose nothing.She said herself she did not wish to change her position. And with herlove I cannot feel envious of Serpuhovskoy." And slowly twirling hismustaches, he got up from the table and walked about the room. His eyesshone particularly brightly, and he felt in that confident, calm, andhappy frame of mind which always came after he had thoroughly faced hisposition. Everything was straight and clear, just as after former daysof reckoning. He shaved, took a cold bath, dressed and went out.


Chapter 21

"We’ve come to fetch you. Your _lessive_ lasted a good time today," saidPetritsky. "Well, is it over?"
"It is over," answered Vronsky, smiling with his eyes only, and twirlingthe tips of his mustaches as circumspectly as though after the perfectorder into which his affairs had been brought any over-bold or rapidmovement might disturb it.
"You’re always just as if you’d come out of a bath after it," saidPetritsky. "I’ve come from Gritsky’s" (that was what they called thecolonel); "they’re expecting you."
Vronsky, without answering, looked at his comrade, thinking of somethingelse.
"Yes; is that music at his place?" he said, listening to the familiarsounds of polkas and waltzes floating across to him. "What’s the fête?"
"Serpuhovskoy’s come."
"Aha!" said Vronsky, "why, I didn’t know."
The smile in his eyes gleamed more brightly than ever.
Having once made up his mind that he was happy in his love, that hesacrificed his ambition to it—having anyway taken up this position,Vronsky was incapable of feeling either envious of Serpuhovskoy or hurtwith him for not coming first to him when he came to the regiment.Serpuhovskoy was a good friend, and he was delighted he had come.
"Ah, I’m very glad!"
The colonel, Demin, had taken a large country house. The whole partywere in the wide lower balcony. In the courtyard the first objects thatmet Vronsky’s eyes were a band of singers in white linen coats, standingnear a barrel of vodka, and the robust, good-humored figure of thecolonel surrounded by officers. He had gone out as far as the first stepof the balcony and was loudly shouting across the band that playedOffenbach’s quadrille, waving his arms and giving some orders to a fewsoldiers standing on one side. A group of soldiers, a quartermaster, andseveral subalterns came up to the balcony with Vronsky. The colonelreturned to the table, went out again onto the steps with a tumbler inhis hand, and proposed the toast, "To the health of our former comrade,the gallant general, Prince Serpuhovskoy. Hurrah!"
The colonel was followed by Serpuhovskoy, who came out onto the stepssmiling, with a glass in his hand.
"You always get younger, Bondarenko," he said to the rosy-checked,smart-looking quartermaster standing just before him, still youngishlooking though doing his second term of service.
It was three years since Vronsky had seen Serpuhovskoy. He looked morerobust, had let his whiskers grow, but was still the same gracefulcreature, whose face and figure were even more striking from theirsoftness and nobility than their beauty. The only change Vronskydetected in him was that subdued, continual radiance of beaming contentwhich settles on the faces of men who are successful and are sure of therecognition of their success by everyone. Vronsky knew that radiant air,and immediately observed it in Serpuhovskoy.
As Serpuhovskoy came down the steps he saw Vronsky. A smile of pleasurelighted up his face. He tossed his head upwards and waved the glass inhis hand, greeting Vronsky, and showing him by the gesture that he couldnot come to him before the quartermaster, who stood craning forward hislips ready to be kissed.
"Here he is!" shouted the colonel. "Yashvin told me you were in one ofyour gloomy tempers."
Serpuhovskoy kissed the moist, fresh lips of the gallant-lookingquartermaster, and wiping his mouth with his handkerchief, went up toVronsky.
"How glad I am!" he said, squeezing his hand and drawing him on oneside.
"You look after him," the colonel shouted to Yashvin, pointing toVronsky; and he went down below to the soldiers.
"Why weren’t you at the races yesterday? I expected to see you there,"said Vronsky, scrutinizing Serpuhovskoy.
"I did go, but late. I beg your pardon," he added, and he turned to theadjutant: "Please have this divided from me, each man as much as it runsto." And he hurriedly took notes for three hundred roubles from hispocketbook, blushing a little.
"Vronsky! Have anything to eat or drink?" asked Yashvin. "Hi, somethingfor the count to eat! Ah, here it is: have a glass!"
The fête at the colonel’s lasted a long while. There was a great deal ofdrinking. They tossed Serpuhovskoy in the air and caught him againseveral times. Then they did the same to the colonel. Then, to theaccompaniment of the band, the colonel himself danced with Petritsky.Then the colonel, who began to show signs of feebleness, sat down on abench in the courtyard and began demonstrating to Yashvin thesuperiority of Russia over Poland, especially in cavalry attack, andthere was a lull in the revelry for a moment. Serpuhovskoy went into thehouse to the bathroom to wash his hands and found Vronsky there; Vronskywas drenching his head with water. He had taken off his coat and put hissunburnt, hairy neck under the tap, and was rubbing it and his head withhis hands. When he had finished, Vronsky sat down by Serpuhovskoy. Theyboth sat down in the bathroom on a lounge, and a conversation beganwhich was very interesting to both of them.
"I’ve always been hearing about you through my wife," said Serpuhovskoy."I’m glad you’ve been seeing her pretty often."
"She’s friendly with Varya, and they’re the only women in Petersburg Icare about seeing," answered Vronsky, smiling. He smiled because heforesaw the topic the conversation would turn on, and he was glad of it.
"The only ones?" Serpuhovskoy queried, smiling.
"Yes; and I heard news of you, but not only through your wife," saidVronsky, checking his hint by a stern expression of face. "I was greatlydelighted to hear of your success, but not a bit surprised. I expectedeven more."
Serpuhovskoy smiled. Such an opinion of him was obviously agreeable tohim, and he did not think it necessary to conceal it.
"Well, I on the contrary expected less—I’ll own frankly. But I’m glad,very glad. I’m ambitious; that’s my weakness, and I confess to it."
"Perhaps you wouldn’t confess to it if you hadn’t been successful," saidVronsky.
"I don’t suppose so," said Serpuhovskoy, smiling again. "I won’t saylife wouldn’t be worth living without it, but it would be dull. Ofcourse I may be mistaken, but I fancy I have a certain capacity for theline I’ve chosen, and that power of any sort in my hands, if it is tobe, will be better than in the hands of a good many people I know," saidSerpuhovskoy, with beaming consciousness of success; "and so the nearerI get to it, the better pleased I am."
"Perhaps that is true for you, but not for everyone. I used to think sotoo, but here I live and think life worth living not only for that."
"There it’s out! here it comes!" said Serpuhovskoy, laughing. "Eversince I heard about you, about your refusal, I began.... Of course, Iapproved of what you did. But there are ways of doing everything. And Ithink your action was good in itself, but you didn’t do it quite in theway you ought to have done."
"What’s done can’t be undone, and you know I never go back on what I’vedone. And besides, I’m very well off."
"Very well off—for the time. But you’re not satisfied with that. Iwouldn’t say this to your brother. He’s a nice child, like our hosthere. There he goes!" he added, listening to the roar of "hurrah!"—"andhe’s happy, but that does not satisfy you."
"I didn’t say it did satisfy me."
"Yes, but that’s not the only thing. Such men as you are wanted."
"By whom?"
"By whom? By society, by Russia. Russia needs men; she needs a party, orelse everything goes and will go to the dogs."
"How do you mean? Bertenev’s party against the Russian communists?"
"No," said Serpuhovskoy, frowning with vexation at being suspected ofsuch an absurdity. "_Tout ça est une blague_. That’s always been andalways will be. There are no communists. But intriguing people have toinvent a noxious, dangerous party. It’s an old trick. No, what’s wantedis a powerful party of independent men like you and me."
"But why so?" Vronsky mentioned a few men who were in power. "Why aren’tthey independent men?"
"Simply because they have not, or have not had from birth, anindependent fortune; they’ve not had a name, they’ve not been close tothe sun and center as we have. They can be bought either by money or byfavor. And they have to find a support for themselves in inventing apolicy. And they bring forward some notion, some policy that they don’tbelieve in, that does harm; and the whole policy is really only a meansto a government house and so much income. _Cela n’est pas plus fin queça_, when you get a peep at their cards. I may be inferior to them,stupider perhaps, though I don’t see why I should be inferior to them.But you and I have one important advantage over them for certain, inbeing more difficult to buy. And such men are more needed than ever."
Vronsky listened attentively, but he was not so much interested by themeaning of the words as by the attitude of Serpuhovskoy who was alreadycontemplating a struggle with the existing powers, and already had hislikes and dislikes in that higher world, while his own interest in thegoverning world did not go beyond the interests of his regiment. Vronskyfelt, too, how powerful Serpuhovskoy might become through hisunmistakable faculty for thinking things out and for taking things in,through his intelligence and gift of words, so rarely met with in theworld in which he moved. And, ashamed as he was of the feeling, he feltenvious.
"Still I haven’t the one thing of most importance for that," heanswered; "I haven’t the desire for power. I had it once, but it’sgone."
"Excuse me, that’s not true," said Serpuhovskoy, smiling.
"Yes, it is true, it is true ... now!" Vronsky added, to be truthful.
"Yes, it’s true now, that’s another thing; but that _now_ won’t lastforever."
"Perhaps," answered Vronsky.
"You say _perhaps_," Serpuhovskoy went on, as though guessing histhoughts, "but I say _for certain_. And that’s what I wanted to see youfor. Your action was just what it should have been. I see that, but youought not to keep it up. I only ask you to give me carte blanche. I’mnot going to offer you my protection ... though, indeed, why shouldn’t Iprotect you?—you’ve protected me often enough! I should hope ourfriendship rises above all that sort of thing. Yes," he said, smiling tohim as tenderly as a woman, "give me _carte blanche_, retire from theregiment, and I’ll draw you upwards imperceptibly."
"But you must understand that I want nothing," said Vronsky, "exceptthat all should be as it is."
Serpuhovskoy got up and stood facing him.
"You say that all should be as it is. I understand what that means. Butlisten: we’re the same age, you’ve known a greater number of womenperhaps than I have." Serpohovskoy’s smile and gestures told Vronskythat he mustn’t be afraid, that he would be tender and careful intouching the sore place. "But I’m married, and believe me, in getting toknow thoroughly one’s wife, if one loves her, as someone has said, onegets to know all women better than if one knew thousands of them."
"We’re coming directly!" Vronsky shouted to an officer, who looked intothe room and called them to the colonel.
Vronsky was longing now to hear to the end and know what Serpuhovskeywould say to him.
"And here’s my opinion for you. Women are the chief stumbling block in aman’s career. It’s hard to love a woman and do anything. There’s onlyone way of having love conveniently without its being a hindrance—that’smarriage. How, how am I to tell you what I mean?" said Serpuhovskoy, wholiked similes. "Wait a minute, wait a minute! Yes, just as you can onlycarry a _fardeau_ and do something with your hands, when the fardeau istied on your back, and that’s marriage. And that’s what I felt when Iwas married. My hands were suddenly set free. But to drag that _fardeau_about with you without marriage, your hands will always be so full thatyou can do nothing. Look at Mazankov, at Krupov. They’ve ruined theircareers for the sake of women."
"What women!" said Vronsky, recalling the Frenchwoman and the actresswith whom the two men he had mentioned were connected.
"The firmer the woman’s footing in society, the worse it is. That’s muchthe same as—not merely carrying the _fardeau_ in your arms—but tearingit away from someone else."
"You have never loved," Vronsky said softly, looking straight before himand thinking of Anna.
"Perhaps. But you remember what I’ve said to you. And another thing,women are all more materialistic than men. We make something immense outof love, but they are always _terre-à-terre_."
"Directly, directly!" he cried to a footman who came in. But the footmanhad not come to call them again, as he supposed. The footman broughtVronsky a note.
"A man brought it from Princess Tverskaya."
Vronsky opened the letter, and flushed crimson.
"My head’s begun to ache; I’m going home," he said to Serpuhovskoy.
"Oh, good-bye then. You give me _carte blanche!_"
"We’ll talk about it later on; I’ll look you up in Petersburg."


Chapter 22

It was six o’clock already, and so, in order to be there quickly, and atthe same time not to drive with his own horses, known to everyone,Vronsky got into Yashvin’s hired fly, and told the driver to drive asquickly as possible. It was a roomy, old-fashioned fly, with seats forfour. He sat in one corner, stretched his legs out on the front seat,and sank into meditation.
A vague sense of the order into which his affairs had been brought, avague recollection of the friendliness and flattery of Serpuhovskoy, whohad considered him a man that was needed, and most of all, theanticipation of the interview before him—all blended into a general,joyous sense of life. This feeling was so strong that he could not helpsmiling. He dropped his legs, crossed one leg over the other knee, andtaking it in his hand, felt the springy muscle of the calf, where it hadbeen grazed the day before by his fall, and leaning back he drew severaldeep breaths.
"I’m happy, very happy!" he said to himself. He had often before hadthis sense of physical joy in his own body, but he had never felt sofond of himself, of his own body, as at that moment. He enjoyed theslight ache in his strong leg, he enjoyed the muscular sensation ofmovement in his chest as he breathed. The bright, cold August day, whichhad made Anna feel so hopeless, seemed to him keenly stimulating, andrefreshed his face and neck that still tingled from the cold water. Thescent of brilliantine on his whiskers struck him as particularlypleasant in the fresh air. Everything he saw from the carriage window,everything in that cold pure air, in the pale light of the sunset, wasas fresh, and gay, and strong as he was himself: the roofs of the housesshining in the rays of the setting sun, the sharp outlines of fences andangles of buildings, the figures of passers-by, the carriages that methim now and then, the motionless green of the trees and grass, thefields with evenly drawn furrows of potatoes, and the slanting shadowsthat fell from the houses, and trees, and bushes, and even from the rowsof potatoes—everything was bright like a pretty landscape just finishedand freshly varnished.
"Get on, get on!" he said to the driver, putting his head out of thewindow, and pulling a three-rouble note out of his pocket he handed itto the man as he looked round. The driver’s hand fumbled with somethingat the lamp, the whip cracked, and the carriage rolled rapidly along thesmooth highroad.
"I want nothing, nothing but this happiness," he thought, staring at thebone button of the bell in the space between the windows, and picturingto himself Anna just as he had seen her last time. "And as I go on, Ilove her more and more. Here’s the garden of the Vrede Villa.Whereabouts will she be? Where? How? Why did she fix on this place tomeet me, and why does she write in Betsy’s letter?" he thought,wondering now for the first time at it. But there was now no time forwonder. He called to the driver to stop before reaching the avenue, andopening the door, jumped out of the carriage as it was moving, and wentinto the avenue that led up to the house. There was no one in theavenue; but looking round to the right he caught sight of her. Her facewas hidden by a veil, but he drank in with glad eyes the specialmovement in walking, peculiar to her alone, the slope of the shoulders,and the setting of the head, and at once a sort of electric shock ranall over him. With fresh force, he felt conscious of himself from thespringy motions of his legs to the movements of his lungs as hebreathed, and something set his lips twitching.
Joining him, she pressed his hand tightly.
"You’re not angry that I sent for you? I absolutely had to see you," shesaid; and the serious and set line of her lips, which he saw under theveil, transformed his mood at once.
"I angry! But how have you come, where from?"
"Never mind," she said, laying her hand on his, "come along, I must talkto you."
He saw that something had happened, and that the interview would not bea joyous one. In her presence he had no will of his own: without knowingthe grounds of her distress, he already felt the same distressunconsciously passing over him.
"What is it? what?" he asked her, squeezing her hand with his elbow, andtrying to read her thoughts in her face.
She walked on a few steps in silence, gathering up her courage; thensuddenly she stopped.
"I did not tell you yesterday," she began, breathing quickly andpainfully, "that coming home with Alexey Alexandrovitch I told himeverything ... told him I could not be his wife, that ... and told himeverything."
He heard her, unconsciously bending his whole figure down to her asthough hoping in this way to soften the hardness of her position forher. But directly she had said this he suddenly drew himself up, and aproud and hard expression came over his face.
"Yes, yes, that’s better, a thousand times better! I know how painful itwas," he said. But she was not listening to his words, she was readinghis thoughts from the expression of his face. She could not guess thatthat expression arose from the first idea that presented itself toVronsky—that a duel was now inevitable. The idea of a duel had nevercrossed her mind, and so she put a different interpretation on thispassing expression of hardness.
When she got her husband’s letter, she knew then at the bottom of herheart that everything would go on in the old way, that she would nothave the strength of will to forego her position, to abandon her son,and to join her lover. The morning spent at Princess Tverskaya’s hadconfirmed her still more in this. But this interview was still of theutmost gravity for her. She hoped that this interview would transformher position, and save her. If on hearing this news he were to say toher resolutely, passionately, without an instant’s wavering: "Throw upeverything and come with me!" she would give up her son and go away withhim. But this news had not produced what she had expected in him; hesimply seemed as though he were resenting some affront.
"It was not in the least painful to me. It happened of itself," she saidirritably; "and see..." she pulled her husband’s letter out of herglove.
"I understand, I understand," he interrupted her, taking the letter, butnot reading it, and trying to soothe her. "The one thing I longed for,the one thing I prayed for, was to cut short this position, so as todevote my life to your happiness."
"Why do you tell me that?" she said. "Do you suppose I can doubt it? IfI doubted..."
"Who’s that coming?" said Vronsky suddenly, pointing to two ladieswalking towards them. "Perhaps they know us!" and he hurriedly turnedoff, drawing her after him into a side path.
"Oh, I don’t care!" she said. Her lips were quivering. And he fanciedthat her eyes looked with strange fury at him from under the veil. "Itell you that’s not the point—I can’t doubt that; but see what he writesto me. Read it." She stood still again.
Again, just as at the first moment of hearing of her rupture with herhusband, Vronsky, on reading the letter, was unconsciously carried awayby the natural sensation aroused in him by his own relation to thebetrayed husband. Now while he held his letter in his hands, he couldnot help picturing the challenge, which he would most likely find athome today or tomorrow, and the duel itself, in which, with the samecold and haughty expression that his face was assuming at this moment hewould await the injured husband’s shot, after having himself fired intothe air. And at that instant there flashed across his mind the thoughtof what Serpuhovskoy had just said to him, and what he had himself beenthinking in the morning—that it was better not to bind himself—and heknew that this thought he could not tell her.
Having read the letter, he raised his eyes to her, and there was nodetermination in them. She saw at once that he had been thinking aboutit before by himself. She knew that whatever he might say to her, hewould not say all he thought. And she knew that her last hope had failedher. This was not what she had been reckoning on.
"You see the sort of man he is," she said, with a shaking voice; "he..."
"Forgive me, but I rejoice at it," Vronsky interrupted. "For God’s sake,let me finish!" he added, his eyes imploring her to give him time toexplain his words. "I rejoice, because things cannot, cannot possiblyremain as he supposes."
"Why can’t they?" Anna said, restraining her tears, and obviouslyattaching no sort of consequence to what he said. She felt that her fatewas sealed.
Vronsky meant that after the duel—inevitable, he thought—things couldnot go on as before, but he said something different.
"It can’t go on. I hope that now you will leave him. I hope"—he wasconfused, and reddened—"that you will let me arrange and plan our life.Tomorrow..." he was beginning.
She did not let him go on.
"But my child!" she shrieked. "You see what he writes! I should have toleave him, and I can’t and won’t do that."
"But, for God’s sake, which is better?—leave your child, or keep up thisdegrading position?"
"To whom is it degrading?"
"To all, and most of all to you."
"You say degrading ... don’t say that. Those words have no meaning forme," she said in a shaking voice. She did not want him now to say whatwas untrue. She had nothing left her but his love, and she wanted tolove him. "Don’t you understand that from the day I loved you everythinghas changed for me? For me there is one thing, and one thing only—yourlove. If that’s mine, I feel so exalted, so strong, that nothing can behumiliating to me. I am proud of my position, because ... proud of being... proud...." She could not say what she was proud of. Tears of shameand despair choked her utterance. She stood still and sobbed.
He felt, too, something swelling in his throat and twitching in hisnose, and for the first time in his life he felt on the point ofweeping. He could not have said exactly what it was touched him so. Hefelt sorry for her, and he felt he could not help her, and with that heknew that he was to blame for her wretchedness, and that he had donesomething wrong.
"Is not a divorce possible?" he said feebly. She shook her head, notanswering. "Couldn’t you take your son, and still leave him?"
"Yes; but it all depends on him. Now I must go to him," she saidshortly. Her presentiment that all would again go on in the old way hadnot deceived her.
"On Tuesday I shall be in Petersburg, and everything can be settled."
"Yes," she said. "But don’t let us talk any more of it."
Anna’s carriage, which she had sent away, and ordered to come back tothe little gate of the Vrede garden, drove up. Anna said good-bye toVronsky, and drove home.


Chapter 23

On Monday there was the usual sitting of the Commission of the 2nd ofJune. Alexey Alexandrovitch walked into the hall where the sitting washeld, greeted the members and the president, as usual, and sat down inhis place, putting his hand on the papers laid ready before him. Amongthese papers lay the necessary evidence and a rough outline of thespeech he intended to make. But he did not really need these documents.He remembered every point, and did not think it necessary to go over inhis memory what he would say. He knew that when the time came, and whenhe saw his enemy facing him, and studiously endeavoring to assume anexpression of indifference, his speech would flow of itself better thanhe could prepare it now. He felt that the import of his speech was ofsuch magnitude that every word of it would have weight. Meantime, as helistened to the usual report, he had the most innocent and inoffensiveair. No one, looking at his white hands, with their swollen veins andlong fingers, so softly stroking the edges of the white paper that laybefore him, and at the air of weariness with which his head drooped onone side, would have suspected that in a few minutes a torrent of wordswould flow from his lips that would arouse a fearful storm, set themembers shouting and attacking one another, and force the president tocall for order. When the report was over, Alexey Alexandrovitchannounced in his subdued, delicate voice that he had several points tobring before the meeting in regard to the Commission for theReorganization of the Native Tribes. All attention was turned upon him.Alexey Alexandrovitch cleared his throat, and not looking at hisopponent, but selecting, as he always did while he was delivering hisspeeches, the first person sitting opposite him, an inoffensive littleold man, who never had an opinion of any sort in the Commission, beganto expound his views. When he reached the point about the fundamentaland radical law, his opponent jumped up and began to protest. Stremov,who was also a member of the Commission, and also stung to the quick,began defending himself, and altogether a stormy sitting followed; butAlexey Alexandrovitch triumphed, and his motion was carried, three newcommissions were appointed, and the next day in a certain Petersburgcircle nothing else was talked of but this sitting. AlexeyAlexandrovitch’s success had been even greater than he had anticipated.
Next morning, Tuesday, Alexey Alexandrovitch, on waking up, recollectedwith pleasure his triumph of the previous day, and he could not helpsmiling, though he tried to appear indifferent, when the chief secretaryof his department, anxious to flatter him, informed him of the rumorsthat had reached him concerning what had happened in the Commission.
Absorbed in business with the chief secretary, Alexey Alexandrovitch hadcompletely forgotten that it was Tuesday, the day fixed by him for thereturn of Anna Arkadyevna, and he was surprised and received a shock ofannoyance when a servant came in to inform him of her arrival.
Anna had arrived in Petersburg early in the morning; the carriage hadbeen sent to meet her in accordance with her telegram, and so AlexeyAlexandrovitch might have known of her arrival. But when she arrived, hedid not meet her. She was told that he had not yet gone out, but wasbusy with his secretary. She sent word to her husband that she had come,went to her own room, and occupied herself in sorting out her things,expecting he would come to her. But an hour passed; he did not come. Shewent into the dining room on the pretext of giving some directions, andspoke loudly on purpose, expecting him to come out there; but he did notcome, though she heard him go to the door of his study as he parted fromthe chief secretary. She knew that he usually went out quickly to hisoffice, and she wanted to see him before that, so that their attitude toone another might be defined.
She walked across the drawing room and went resolutely to him. When shewent into his study he was in official uniform, obviously ready to goout, sitting at a little table on which he rested his elbows, lookingdejectedly before him. She saw him before he saw her, and she saw thathe was thinking of her.
On seeing her, he would have risen, but changed his mind, then his faceflushed hotly—a thing Anna had never seen before, and he got up quicklyand went to meet her, looking not at her eyes, but above them at herforehead and hair. He went up to her, took her by the hand, and askedher to sit down.
"I am very glad you have come," he said, sitting down beside her, andobviously wishing to say something, he stuttered. Several times he triedto begin to speak, but stopped. In spite of the fact that, preparingherself for meeting him, she had schooled herself to despise andreproach him, she did not know what to say to him, and she felt sorryfor him. And so the silence lasted for some time. "Is Seryozha quitewell?" he said, and not waiting for an answer, he added: "I shan’t bedining at home today, and I have got to go out directly."
"I had thought of going to Moscow," she said.
"No, you did quite, quite right to come," he said, and was silent again.
Seeing that he was powerless to begin the conversation, she beganherself.
"Alexey Alexandrovitch," she said, looking at him and not dropping hereyes under his persistent gaze at her hair, "I’m a guilty woman, I’m abad woman, but I am the same as I was, as I told you then, and I havecome to tell you that I can change nothing."
"I have asked you no question about that," he said, all at once,resolutely and with hatred looking her straight in the face; "that wasas I had supposed." Under the influence of anger he apparently regainedcomplete possession of all his faculties. "But as I told you then, andhave written to you," he said in a thin, shrill voice, "I repeat now,that I am not bound to know this. I ignore it. Not all wives are so kindas you, to be in such a hurry to communicate such agreeable news totheir husbands." He laid special emphasis on the word "agreeable." "Ishall ignore it so long as the world knows nothing of it, so long as myname is not disgraced. And so I simply inform you that our relationsmust be just as they have always been, and that only in the event ofyour compromising me I shall be obliged to take steps to secure myhonor."
"But our relations cannot be the same as always," Anna began in a timidvoice, looking at him with dismay.
When she saw once more those composed gestures, heard that shrill,childish, and sarcastic voice, her aversion for him extinguished herpity for him, and she felt only afraid, but at all costs she wanted tomake clear her position.
"I cannot be your wife while I...." she began.
He laughed a cold and malignant laugh.
"The manner of life you have chosen is reflected, I suppose, in yourideas. I have too much respect or contempt, or both ... I respect yourpast and despise your present ... that I was far from the interpretationyou put on my words."
Anna sighed and bowed her head.
"Though indeed I fail to comprehend how, with the independence youshow," he went on, getting hot, "—announcing your infidelity to yourhusband and seeing nothing reprehensible in it, apparently—you can seeanything reprehensible in performing a wife’s duties in relation to yourhusband."
"Alexey Alexandrovitch! What is it you want of me?"
"I want you not to meet that man here, and to conduct yourself so thatneither the world nor the servants can reproach you ... not to see him.That’s not much, I think. And in return you will enjoy all theprivileges of a faithful wife without fulfilling her duties. That’s allI have to say to you. Now it’s time for me to go. I’m not dining athome." He got up and moved towards the door.
Anna got up too. Bowing in silence, he let her pass before him.


Chapter 24

The night spent by Levin on the haycock did not pass without result forhim. The way in which he had been managing his land revolted him and hadlost all attraction for him. In spite of the magnificent harvest, neverhad there been, or, at least, never it seemed to him, had there been somany hindrances and so many quarrels between him and the peasants asthat year, and the origin of these failures and this hostility was nowperfectly comprehensible to him. The delight he had experienced in thework itself, and the consequent greater intimacy with the peasants, theenvy he felt of them, of their life, the desire to adopt that life,which had been to him that night not a dream but an intention, theexecution of which he had thought out in detail—all this had sotransformed his view of the farming of the land as he had managed it,that he could not take his former interest in it, and could not helpseeing that unpleasant relation between him and the workpeople which wasthe foundation of it all. The herd of improved cows such as Pava, thewhole land ploughed over and enriched, the nine level fields surroundedwith hedges, the two hundred and forty acres heavily manured, the seedsown in drills, and all the rest of it—it was all splendid if only thework had been done for themselves, or for themselves and comrades—peoplein sympathy with them. But he saw clearly now (his work on a book ofagriculture, in which the chief element in husbandry was to have beenthe laborer, greatly assisted him in this) that the sort of farming hewas carrying on was nothing but a cruel and stubborn struggle betweenhim and the laborers, in which there was on one side—his side—acontinual intense effort to change everything to a pattern he consideredbetter; on the other side, the natural order of things. And in thisstruggle he saw that with immense expenditure of force on his side, andwith no effort or even intention on the other side, all that wasattained was that the work did not go to the liking of either side, andthat splendid tools, splendid cattle and land were spoiled with no goodto anyone. Worst of all, the energy expended on this work was not simplywasted. He could not help feeling now, since the meaning of this systemhad become clear to him, that the aim of his energy was a most unworthyone. In reality, what was the struggle about? He was struggling forevery farthing of his share (and he could not help it, for he had onlyto relax his efforts, and he would not have had the money to pay hislaborers’ wages), while they were only struggling to be able to do theirwork easily and agreeably, that is to say, as they were used to doingit. It was for his interests that every laborer should work as hard aspossible, and that while doing so he should keep his wits about him, soas to try not to break the winnowing machines, the horse rakes, thethrashing machines, that he should attend to what he was doing. What thelaborer wanted was to work as pleasantly as possible, with rests, andabove all, carelessly and heedlessly, without thinking. That summerLevin saw this at every step. He sent the men to mow some clover forhay, picking out the worst patches where the clover was overgrown withgrass and weeds and of no use for seed; again and again they mowed thebest acres of clover, justifying themselves by the pretense that thebailiff had told them to, and trying to pacify him with the assurancethat it would be splendid hay; but he knew that it was owing to thoseacres being so much easier to mow. He sent out a hay machine forpitching the hay—it was broken at the first row because it was dull workfor a peasant to sit on the seat in front with the great wings wavingabove him. And he was told, "Don’t trouble, your honor, sure, thewomenfolks will pitch it quick enough." The ploughs were practicallyuseless, because it never occurred to the laborer to raise the sharewhen he turned the plough, and forcing it round, he strained the horsesand tore up the ground, and Levin was begged not to mind about it. Thehorses were allowed to stray into the wheat because not a single laborerwould consent to be night-watchman, and in spite of orders to thecontrary, the laborers insisted on taking turns for night duty, andIvan, after working all day long, fell asleep, and was very penitent forhis fault, saying, "Do what you will to me, your honor."
They killed three of the best calves by letting them into the cloveraftermath without care as to their drinking, and nothing would make themen believe that they had been blown out by the clover, but they toldhim, by way of consolation, that one of his neighbors had lost a hundredand twelve head of cattle in three days. All this happened, not becauseanyone felt ill-will to Levin or his farm; on the contrary, he knew thatthey liked him, thought him a simple gentleman (their highest praise);but it happened simply because all they wanted was to work merrily andcarelessly, and his interests were not only remote and incomprehensibleto them, but fatally opposed to their most just claims. Long before,Levin had felt dissatisfaction with his own position in regard to theland. He saw where his boat leaked, but he did not look for the leak,perhaps purposely deceiving himself. (Nothing would be left him if helost faith in it.) But now he could deceive himself no longer. Thefarming of the land, as he was managing it, had become not merelyunattractive but revolting to him, and he could take no further interestin it.
To this now was joined the presence, only twenty-five miles off, ofKitty Shtcherbatskaya, whom he longed to see and could not see. DaryaAlexandrovna Oblonskaya had invited him, when he was over there, tocome; to come with the object of renewing his offer to her sister, whowould, so she gave him to understand, accept him now. Levin himself hadfelt on seeing Kitty Shtcherbatskaya that he had never ceased to loveher; but he could not go over to the Oblonskys’, knowing she was there.The fact that he had made her an offer, and she had refused him, hadplaced an insuperable barrier between her and him. "I can’t ask her tobe my wife merely because she can’t be the wife of the man she wanted tomarry," he said to himself. The thought of this made him cold andhostile to her. "I should not be able to speak to her without a feelingof reproach; I could not look at her without resentment; and she willonly hate me all the more, as she’s bound to. And besides, how can Inow, after what Darya Alexandrovna told me, go to see them? Can I helpshowing that I know what she told me? And me to go magnanimously toforgive her, and have pity on her! Me go through a performance beforeher of forgiving, and deigning to bestow my love on her!... What inducedDarya Alexandrovna to tell me that? By chance I might have seen her,then everything would have happened of itself; but, as it is, it’s outof the question, out of the question!"
Darya Alexandrovna sent him a letter, asking him for a side-saddle forKitty’s use. "I’m told you have a side-saddle," she wrote to him; "Ihope you will bring it over yourself."
This was more than he could stand. How could a woman of anyintelligence, of any delicacy, put her sister in such a humiliatingposition! He wrote ten notes, and tore them all up, and sent the saddlewithout any reply. To write that he would go was impossible, because hecould not go; to write that he could not come because somethingprevented him, or that he would be away, that was still worse. He sentthe saddle without an answer, and with a sense of having done somethingshameful; he handed over all the now revolting business of the estate tothe bailiff, and set off next day to a remote district to see his friendSviazhsky, who had splendid marshes for grouse in his neighborhood, andhad lately written to ask him to keep a long-standing promise to staywith him. The grouse-marsh, in the Surovsky district, had long temptedLevin, but he had continually put off this visit on account of his workon the estate. Now he was glad to get away from the neighborhood of theShtcherbatskys, and still more from his farm work, especially on ashooting expedition, which always in trouble served as the bestconsolation.


Chapter 25

In the Surovsky district there was no railway nor service of posthorses, and Levin drove there with his own horses in his big,old-fashioned carriage.
He stopped halfway at a well-to-do peasant’s to feed his horses. A bald,well-preserved old man, with a broad, red beard, gray on his cheeks,opened the gate, squeezing against the gatepost to let the three horsespass. Directing the coachman to a place under the shed in the big,clean, tidy yard, with charred, old-fashioned ploughs in it, the old manasked Levin to come into the parlor. A cleanly dressed young woman, withclogs on her bare feet, was scrubbing the floor in the new outer room.She was frightened of the dog, that ran in after Levin, and uttered ashriek, but began laughing at her own fright at once when she was toldthe dog would not hurt her. Pointing Levin with her bare arm to the doorinto the parlor, she bent down again, hiding her handsome face, and wenton scrubbing.
"Would you like the samovar?" she asked.
"Yes, please."
The parlor was a big room, with a Dutch stove, and a screen dividing itinto two. Under the holy pictures stood a table painted in patterns, abench, and two chairs. Near the entrance was a dresser full of crockery.The shutters were closed, there were few flies, and it was so clean thatLevin was anxious that Laska, who had been running along the road andbathing in puddles, should not muddy the floor, and ordered her to aplace in the corner by the door. After looking round the parlor, Levinwent out in the back yard. The good-looking young woman in clogs,swinging the empty pails on the yoke, ran on before him to the well forwater.
"Look sharp, my girl!" the old man shouted after her, good-humoredly,and he went up to Levin. "Well, sir, are you going to Nikolay IvanovitchSviazhsky? His honor comes to us too," he began, chatting, leaning hiselbows on the railing of the steps. In the middle of the old man’saccount of his acquaintance with Sviazhsky, the gates creaked again, andlaborers came into the yard from the fields, with wooden ploughs andharrows. The horses harnessed to the ploughs and harrows were sleek andfat. The laborers were obviously of the household: two were young men incotton shirts and caps, the two others were hired laborers in homespunshirts, one an old man, the other a young fellow. Moving off from thesteps, the old man went up to the horses and began unharnessing them.
"What have they been ploughing?" asked Levin.
"Ploughing up the potatoes. We rent a bit of land too. Fedot, don’t letout the gelding, but take it to the trough, and we’ll put the other inharness."
"Oh, father, the ploughshares I ordered, has he brought them along?"asked the big, healthy-looking fellow, obviously the old man’s son.
"There ... in the outer room," answered the old man, bundling togetherthe harness he had taken off, and flinging it on the ground. "You canput them on, while they have dinner."
The good-looking young woman came into the outer room with the fullpails dragging at her shoulders. More women came on the scene fromsomewhere, young and handsome, middle-aged, old and ugly, with childrenand without children.
The samovar was beginning to sing; the laborers and the family, havingdisposed of the horses, came in to dinner. Levin, getting his provisionsout of his carriage, invited the old man to take tea with him.
"Well, I have had some today already," said the old man, obviouslyaccepting the invitation with pleasure. "But just a glass for company."
Over their tea Levin heard all about the old man’s farming. Ten yearsbefore, the old man had rented three hundred acres from the lady whoowned them, and a year ago he had bought them and rented another threehundred from a neighboring landowner. A small part of the land—the worstpart—he let out for rent, while a hundred acres of arable land hecultivated himself with his family and two hired laborers. The old mancomplained that things were doing badly. But Levin saw that he simplydid so from a feeling of propriety, and that his farm was in aflourishing condition. If it had been unsuccessful he would not havebought land at thirty-five roubles the acre, he would not have marriedhis three sons and a nephew, he would not have rebuilt twice afterfires, and each time on a larger scale. In spite of the old man’scomplaints, it was evident that he was proud, and justly proud, of hisprosperity, proud of his sons, his nephew, his sons’ wives, his horsesand his cows, and especially of the fact that he was keeping all thisfarming going. From his conversation with the old man, Levin thought hewas not averse to new methods either. He had planted a great manypotatoes, and his potatoes, as Levin had seen driving past, were alreadypast flowering and beginning to die down, while Levin’s were only justcoming into flower. He earthed up his potatoes with a modern ploughborrowed from a neighboring landowner. He sowed wheat. The trifling factthat, thinning out his rye, the old man used the rye he thinned out forhis horses, specially struck Levin. How many times had Levin seen thissplendid fodder wasted, and tried to get it saved; but always it hadturned out to be impossible. The peasant got this done, and he could notsay enough in praise of it as food for the beasts.
"What have the wenches to do? They carry it out in bundles to theroadside, and the cart brings it away."
"Well, we landowners can’t manage well with our laborers," said Levin,handing him a glass of tea.
"Thank you," said the old man, and he took the glass, but refused sugar,pointing to a lump he had left. "They’re simple destruction," said he."Look at Sviazhsky’s, for instance. We know what the land’slike—first-rate, yet there’s not much of a crop to boast of. It’s notlooked after enough—that’s all it is!"
"But you work your land with hired laborers?"
"We’re all peasants together. We go into everything ourselves. If aman’s no use, he can go, and we can manage by ourselves."
"Father, Finogen wants some tar," said the young woman in the clogs,coming in.
"Yes, yes, that’s how it is, sir!" said the old man, getting up, andcrossing himself deliberately, he thanked Levin and went out.
When Levin went into the kitchen to call his coachman he saw the wholefamily at dinner. The women were standing up waiting on them. The young,sturdy-looking son was telling something funny with his mouth full ofpudding, and they were all laughing, the woman in the clogs, who waspouring cabbage soup into a bowl, laughing most merrily of all.
Very probably the good-looking face of the young woman in the clogs hada good deal to do with the impression of well-being this peasanthousehold made upon Levin, but the impression was so strong that Levincould never get rid of it. And all the way from the old peasant’s toSviazhsky’s he kept recalling this peasant farm as though there weresomething in this impression that demanded his special attention.


Chapter 26

Sviazhsky was the marshal of his district. He was five years older thanLevin, and had long been married. His sister-in-law, a young girl Levinliked very much, lived in his house; and Levin knew that Sviazhsky andhis wife would have greatly liked to marry the girl to him. He knew thiswith certainty, as so-called eligible young men always know it, thoughhe could never have brought himself to speak of it to anyone; and heknew too that, although he wanted to get married, and although by everytoken this very attractive girl would make an excellent wife, he couldno more have married her, even if he had not been in love with KittyShtcherbatskaya, than he could have flown up to the sky. And thisknowledge poisoned the pleasure he had hoped to find in the visit toSviazhsky.
On getting Sviazhsky’s letter with the invitation for shooting, Levinhad immediately thought of this; but in spite of it he had made up hismind that Sviazhsky’s having such views for him was simply his owngroundless supposition, and so he would go, all the same. Besides, atthe bottom of his heart he had a desire to try himself, put himself tothe test in regard to this girl. The Sviazhskys’ home-life wasexceedingly pleasant, and Sviazhsky himself, the best type of man takingpart in local affairs that Levin knew, was very interesting to him.
Sviazhsky was one of those people, always a source of wonder to Levin,whose convictions, very logical though never original, go one way bythemselves, while their life, exceedingly definite and firm in itsdirection, goes its way quite apart and almost always in directcontradiction to their convictions. Sviazhsky was an extremely advancedman. He despised the nobility, and believed the mass of the nobility tobe secretly in favor of serfdom, and only concealing their views fromcowardice. He regarded Russia as a ruined country, rather after thestyle of Turkey, and the government of Russia as so bad that he neverpermitted himself to criticize its doings seriously, and yet he was afunctionary of that government and a model marshal of nobility, and whenhe drove about he always wore the cockade of office and the cap with thered band. He considered human life only tolerable abroad, and wentabroad to stay at every opportunity, and at the same time he carried ona complex and improved system of agriculture in Russia, and with extremeinterest followed everything and knew everything that was being done inRussia. He considered the Russian peasant as occupying a stage ofdevelopment intermediate between the ape and the man, and at the sametime in the local assemblies no one was readier to shake hands with thepeasants and listen to their opinion. He believed neither in God nor thedevil, but was much concerned about the question of the improvement ofthe clergy and the maintenance of their revenues, and took specialtrouble to keep up the church in his village.
On the woman question he was on the side of the extreme advocates ofcomplete liberty for women, and especially their right to labor. But helived with his wife on such terms that their affectionate childless homelife was the admiration of everyone, and arranged his wife’s life sothat she did nothing and could do nothing but share her husband’sefforts that her time should pass as happily and as agreeably aspossible.
If it had not been a characteristic of Levin’s to put the most favorableinterpretation on people, Sviazhsky’s character would have presented nodoubt or difficulty to him: he would have said to himself, "a fool or aknave," and everything would have seemed clear. But he could not say "afool," because Sviazhsky was unmistakably clever, and moreover, a highlycultivated man, who was exceptionally modest over his culture. There wasnot a subject he knew nothing of. But he did not display his knowledgeexcept when he was compelled to do so. Still less could Levin say thathe was a knave, as Sviazhsky was unmistakably an honest, good-hearted,sensible man, who worked good-humoredly, keenly, and perseveringly athis work; he was held in high honor by everyone about him, and certainlyhe had never consciously done, and was indeed incapable of doing,anything base.
Levin tried to understand him, and could not understand him, and lookedat him and his life as at a living enigma.
Levin and he were very friendly, and so Levin used to venture to soundSviazhsky, to try to get at the very foundation of his view of life; butit was always in vain. Every time Levin tried to penetrate beyond theouter chambers of Sviazhsky’s mind, which were hospitably open to all,he noticed that Sviazhsky was slightly disconcerted; faint signs ofalarm were visible in his eyes, as though he were afraid Levin wouldunderstand him, and he would give him a kindly, good-humored repulse.
Just now, since his disenchantment with farming, Levin was particularlyglad to stay with Sviazhsky. Apart from the fact that the sight of thishappy and affectionate couple, so pleased with themselves and everyoneelse, and their well-ordered home had always a cheering effect on Levin,he felt a longing, now that he was so dissatisfied with his own life, toget at that secret in Sviazhsky that gave him such clearness,definiteness, and good courage in life. Moreover, Levin knew that atSviazhsky’s he should meet the landowners of the neighborhood, and itwas particularly interesting for him just now to hear and take part inthose rural conversations concerning crops, laborers’ wages, and so on,which, he was aware, are conventionally regarded as something very low,but which seemed to him just now to constitute the one subject ofimportance. "It was not, perhaps, of importance in the days of serfdom,and it may not be of importance in England. In both cases the conditionsof agriculture are firmly established; but among us now, when everythinghas been turned upside down and is only just taking shape, the questionwhat form these conditions will take is the one question of importancein Russia," thought Levin.
The shooting turned out to be worse than Levin had expected. The marshwas dry and there were no grouse at all. He walked about the whole dayand only brought back three birds, but to make up for that—he broughtback, as he always did from shooting, an excellent appetite, excellentspirits, and that keen, intellectual mood which with him alwaysaccompanied violent physical exertion. And while out shooting, when heseemed to be thinking of nothing at all, suddenly the old man and hisfamily kept coming back to his mind, and the impression of them seemedto claim not merely his attention, but the solution of some questionconnected with them.
In the evening at tea, two landowners who had come about some businessconnected with a wardship were of the party, and the interestingconversation Levin had been looking forward to sprang up.
Levin was sitting beside his hostess at the tea table, and was obligedto keep up a conversation with her and her sister, who was sittingopposite him. Madame Sviazhskaya was a round-faced, fair-haired, rathershort woman, all smiles and dimples. Levin tried through her to get asolution of the weighty enigma her husband presented to his mind; but hehad not complete freedom of ideas, because he was in an agony ofembarrassment. This agony of embarrassment was due to the fact that thesister-in-law was sitting opposite to him, in a dress, specially put on,as he fancied, for his benefit, cut particularly open, in the shape of atrapeze, on her white bosom. This quadrangular opening, in spite of thebosom’s being very white, or just because it was very white, deprivedLevin of the full use of his faculties. He imagined, probablymistakenly, that this low-necked bodice had been made on his account,and felt that he had no right to look at it, and tried not to look atit; but he felt that he was to blame for the very fact of the low-neckedbodice having been made. It seemed to Levin that he had deceivedsomeone, that he ought to explain something, but that to explain it wasimpossible, and for that reason he was continually blushing, was ill atease and awkward. His awkwardness infected the pretty sister-in-law too.But their hostess appeared not to observe this, and kept purposelydrawing her into the conversation.
"You say," she said, pursuing the subject that had been started, "thatmy husband cannot be interested in what’s Russian. It’s quite thecontrary; he is always in cheerful spirits abroad, but not as he ishere. Here, he feels in his proper place. He has so much to do, and hehas the faculty of interesting himself in everything. Oh, you’ve notbeen to see our school, have you?"
"I’ve seen it.... The little house covered with ivy, isn’t it?"
"Yes; that’s Nastia’s work," she said, indicating her sister.
"You teach in it yourself?" asked Levin, trying to look above the openneck, but feeling that wherever he looked in that direction he shouldsee it.
"Yes; I used to teach in it myself, and do teach still, but we have afirst-rate schoolmistress now. And we’ve started gymnastic exercises."
"No, thank you, I won’t have any more tea," said Levin, and conscious ofdoing a rude thing, but incapable of continuing the conversation, he gotup, blushing. "I hear a very interesting conversation," he added, andwalked to the other end of the table, where Sviazhsky was sitting withthe two gentlemen of the neighborhood. Sviazhsky was sitting sideways,with one elbow on the table, and a cup in one hand, while with the otherhand he gathered up his beard, held it to his nose and let it dropagain, as though he were smelling it. His brilliant black eyes werelooking straight at the excited country gentleman with gray whiskers,and apparently he derived amusement from his remarks. The gentleman wascomplaining of the peasants. It was evident to Levin that Sviazhsky knewan answer to this gentleman’s complaints, which would at once demolishhis whole contention, but that in his position he could not giveutterance to this answer, and listened, not without pleasure, to thelandowner’s comic speeches.
The gentleman with the gray whiskers was obviously an inveterateadherent of serfdom and a devoted agriculturist, who had lived all hislife in the country. Levin saw proofs of this in his dress, in theold-fashioned threadbare coat, obviously not his everyday attire, in hisshrewd, deep-set eyes, in his idiomatic, fluent Russian, in theimperious tone that had become habitual from long use, and in theresolute gestures of his large, red, sunburnt hands, with an oldbetrothal ring on the little finger.


Chapter 27

"If I’d only the heart to throw up what’s been set going ... such a lotof trouble wasted ... I’d turn my back on the whole business, sell up,go off like Nikolay Ivanovitch ... to hear _La Belle Hélène_," said thelandowner, a pleasant smile lighting up his shrewd old face.
"But you see you don’t throw it up," said Nikolay Ivanovitch Sviazhsky;"so there must be something gained."
"The only gain is that I live in my own house, neither bought nor hired.Besides, one keeps hoping the people will learn sense. Though, insteadof that, you’d never believe it—the drunkenness, the immorality! Theykeep chopping and changing their bits of land. Not a sight of a horse ora cow. The peasant’s dying of hunger, but just go and take him on as alaborer, he’ll do his best to do you a mischief, and then bring you upbefore the justice of the peace."
"But then you make complaints to the justice too," said Sviazhsky.
"I lodge complaints? Not for anything in the world! Such a talking, andsuch a to-do, that one would have cause to regret it. At the works, forinstance, they pocketed the advance-money and made off. What did thejustice do? Why, acquitted them. Nothing keeps them in order but theirown communal court and their village elder. He’ll flog them in the goodold style! But for that there’d be nothing for it but to give it all upand run away."
Obviously the landowner was chaffing Sviazhsky, who, far from resentingit, was apparently amused by it.
"But you see we manage our land without such extreme measures," said he,smiling: "Levin and I and this gentleman."
He indicated the other landowner.
"Yes, the thing’s done at Mihail Petrovitch’s, but ask him how it’sdone. Do you call that a rational system?" said the landowner, obviouslyrather proud of the word "rational."
"My system’s very simple," said Mihail Petrovitch, "thank God. All mymanagement rests on getting the money ready for the autumn taxes, andthe peasants come to me, ‘Father, master, help us!’ Well, the peasantsare all one’s neighbors; one feels for them. So one advances them athird, but one says: ‘Remember, lads, I have helped you, and you musthelp me when I need it—whether it’s the sowing of the oats, or thehaycutting, or the harvest’; and well, one agrees, so much for eachtaxpayer—though there are dishonest ones among them too, it’s true."
Levin, who had long been familiar with these patriarchal methods,exchanged glances with Sviazhsky and interrupted Mihail Petrovitch,turning again to the gentleman with the gray whiskers.
"Then what do you think?" he asked; "what system is one to adoptnowadays?"
"Why, manage like Mihail Petrovitch, or let the land for half the cropor for rent to the peasants; that one can do—only that’s just how thegeneral prosperity of the country is being ruined. Where the land withserf-labor and good management gave a yield of nine to one, on thehalf-crop system it yields three to one. Russia has been ruined by theemancipation!"
Sviazhsky looked with smiling eyes at Levin, and even made a faintgesture of irony to him; but Levin did not think the landowner’s wordsabsurd, he understood them better than he did Sviazhsky. A great dealmore of what the gentleman with the gray whiskers said to show in whatway Russia was ruined by the emancipation struck him indeed as verytrue, new to him, and quite incontestable. The landowner unmistakablyspoke his own individual thought—a thing that very rarely happens—and athought to which he had been brought not by a desire of finding someexercise for an idle brain, but a thought which had grown up out of theconditions of his life, which he had brooded over in the solitude of hisvillage, and had considered in every aspect.
"The point is, don’t you see, that progress of every sort is only madeby the use of authority," he said, evidently wishing to show he was notwithout culture. "Take the reforms of Peter, of Catherine, of Alexander.Take European history. And progress in agriculture more than anythingelse—the potato, for instance, that was introduced among us by force.The wooden plough too wasn’t always used. It was introduced maybe in thedays before the Empire, but it was probably brought in by force. Now, inour own day, we landowners in the serf times used various improvementsin our husbandry: drying machines and thrashing machines, and cartingmanure and all the modern implements—all that we brought into use by ourauthority, and the peasants opposed it at first, and ended by imitatingus. Now, by the abolition of serfdom we have been deprived of ourauthority; and so our husbandry, where it had been raised to a highlevel, is bound to sink to the most savage primitive condition. That’show I see it."
"But why so? If it’s rational, you’ll be able to keep up the same systemwith hired labor," said Sviazhsky.
"We’ve no power over them. With whom am I going to work the system,allow me to ask?"
"There it is—the labor force—the chief element in agriculture," thoughtLevin.
"With laborers."
"The laborers won’t work well, and won’t work with good implements. Ourlaborer can do nothing but get drunk like a pig, and when he’s drunk heruins everything you give him. He makes the horses ill with too muchwater, cuts good harness, barters the tires of the wheels for drink,drops bits of iron into the thrashing machine, so as to break it. Heloathes the sight of anything that’s not after his fashion. And that’show it is the whole level of husbandry has fallen. Lands gone out ofcultivation, overgrown with weeds, or divided among the peasants, andwhere millions of bushels were raised you get a hundred thousand; thewealth of the country has decreased. If the same thing had been done,but with care that..."
And he proceeded to unfold his own scheme of emancipation by means ofwhich these drawbacks might have been avoided.
This did not interest Levin, but when he had finished, Levin went backto his first position, and, addressing Sviazhsky, and trying to draw himinto expressing his serious opinion:-‘
"That the standard of culture is falling, and that with our presentrelations to the peasants there is no possibility of farming on arational system to yield a profit—that’s perfectly true," said he.
"I don’t believe it," Sviazhsky replied quite seriously; "all I see isthat we don’t know how to cultivate the land, and that our system ofagriculture in the serf days was by no means too high, but too low. Wehave no machines, no good stock, no efficient supervision; we don’t evenknow how to keep accounts. Ask any landowner; he won’t be able to tellyou what crop’s profitable, and what’s not."
"Italian bookkeeping," said the gentleman of the gray whiskersironically. "You may keep your books as you like, but if they spoileverything for you, there won’t be any profit."
"Why do they spoil things? A poor thrashing machine, or your Russianpresser, they will break, but my steam press they don’t break. Awretched Russian nag they’ll ruin, but keep good dray-horses—they won’truin them. And so it is all round. We must raise our farming to a higherlevel."
"Oh, if one only had the means to do it, Nikolay Ivanovitch! It’s allvery well for you; but for me, with a son to keep at the university,lads to be educated at the high school—how am I going to buy thesedray-horses?"
"Well, that’s what the land banks are for."
"To get what’s left me sold by auction? No, thank you."
"I don’t agree that it’s necessary or possible to raise the level ofagriculture still higher," said Levin. "I devote myself to it, and Ihave means, but I can do nothing. As to the banks, I don’t know to whomthey’re any good. For my part, anyway, whatever I’ve spent money on inthe way of husbandry, it has been a loss: stock—a loss, machinery—aloss."
"That’s true enough," the gentleman with the gray whiskers chimed in,positively laughing with satisfaction.
"And I’m not the only one," pursued Levin. "I mix with all theneighboring landowners, who are cultivating their land on a rationalsystem; they all, with rare exceptions, are doing so at a loss. Come,tell us how does your land do—does it pay?" said Levin, and at once inSviazhsky’s eyes he detected that fleeting expression of alarm which hehad noticed whenever he had tried to penetrate beyond the outer chambersof Sviazhsky’s mind.
Moreover, this question on Levin’s part was not quite in good faith.Madame Sviazhskaya had just told him at tea that they had that summerinvited a German expert in bookkeeping from Moscow, who for aconsideration of five hundred roubles had investigated the management oftheir property, and found that it was costing them a loss of threethousand odd roubles. She did not remember the precise sum, but itappeared that the German had worked it out to the fraction of afarthing.
The gray-whiskered landowner smiled at the mention of the profits ofSviazhsky’s famling, obviously aware how much gain his neighbor andmarshal was likely to be making.
"Possibly it does not pay," answered Sviazhsky. "That merely proveseither that I’m a bad manager, or that I’ve sunk my capital for theincrease of my rents."
"Oh, rent!" Levin cried with horror. "Rent there may be in Europe, whereland has been improved by the labor put into it, but with us all theland is deteriorating from the labor put into it—in other words they’reworking it out; so there’s no question of rent."
"How no rent? It’s a law."
"Then we’re outside the law; rent explains nothing for us, but simplymuddles us. No, tell me how there can be a theory of rent?..."
"Will you have some junket? Masha, pass us some junket or raspberries."He turned to his wife. "Extraordinarily late the raspberries are lastingthis year."
And in the happiest frame of mind Sviazhsky got up and walked off,apparently supposing the conversation to have ended at the very pointwhen to Levin it seemed that it was only just beginning.
Having lost his antagonist, Levin continued the conversation with thegray-whiskered landowner, trying to prove to him that all the difficultyarises from the fact that we don’t find out the peculiarities and habitsof our laborer; but the landowner, like all men who think independentlyand in isolation, was slow in taking in any other person’s idea, andparticularly partial to his own. He stuck to it that the Russian peasantis a swine and likes swinishness, and that to get him out of hisswinishness one must have authority, and there is none; one must havethe stick, and we have become so liberal that we have all of a suddenreplaced the stick that served us for a thousand years by lawyers andmodel prisons, where the worthless, stinking peasant is fed on good soupand has a fixed allowance of cubic feet of air.
"What makes you think," said Levin, trying to get back to the question,"that it’s impossible to find some relation to the laborer in which thelabor would become productive?"
"That never could be so with the Russian peasantry; we’ve no power overthem," answered the landowner.
"How can new conditions be found?" said Sviazhsky. Having eaten somejunket and lighted a cigarette, he came back to the discussion. "Allpossible relations to the labor force have been defined and studied," hesaid. "The relic of barbarism, the primitive commune with each guaranteefor all, will disappear of itself; serfdom has been abolished—thereremains nothing but free labor, and its forms are fixed and ready made,and must be adopted. Permanent hands, day-laborers, rammers—you can’tget out of those forms."
"But Europe is dissatisfied with these forms."
"Dissatisfied, and seeking new ones. And will find them, in allprobability."
"That’s just what I was meaning," answered Levin. "Why shouldn’t we seekthem for ourselves?"
"Because it would be just like inventing afresh the means forconstructing railways. They are ready, invented."
"But if they don’t do for us, if they’re stupid?" said Levin.
And again he detected the expression of alarm in the eyes of Sviazhsky.
"Oh, yes; we’ll bury the world under our caps! We’ve found the secretEurope was seeking for! I’ve heard all that; but, excuse me, do you knowall that’s been done in Europe on the question of the organization oflabor?"
"No, very little."
"That question is now absorbing the best minds in Europe. TheSchulze-Delitsch movement.... And then all this enormous literature ofthe labor question, the most liberal Lassalle movement ... the Mulhausenexperiment? That’s a fact by now, as you’re probably aware."
"I have some idea of it, but very vague."
"No, you only say that; no doubt you know all about it as well as I do.I’m not a professor of sociology, of course, but it interested me, andreally, if it interests you, you ought to study it."
"But what conclusion have they come to?"
"Excuse me..."
The two neighbors had risen, and Sviazhsky, once more checking Levin inhis inconvenient habit of peeping into what was beyond the outerchambers of his mind, went to see his guests out.


Chapter 28

Levin was insufferably bored that evening with the ladies; he wasstirred as he had never been before by the idea that the dissatisfactionhe was feeling with his system of managing his land was not anexceptional case, but the general condition of things in Russia; thatthe organization of some relation of the laborers to the soil in whichthey would work, as with the peasant he had met half-way to theSviazhskys’, was not a dream, but a problem which must be solved. And itseemed to him that the problem could be solved, and that he ought to tryand solve it.
After saying good-night to the ladies, and promising to stay the wholeof the next day, so as to make an expedition on horseback with them tosee an interesting ruin in the crown forest, Levin went, before going tobed, into his host’s study to get the books on the labor question thatSviazhsky had offered him. Sviazhsky’s study was a huge room, surroundedby bookcases and with two tables in it—one a massive writing table,standing in the middle of the room, and the other a round table, coveredwith recent numbers of reviews and journals in different languages,ranged like the rays of a star round the lamp. On the writing table wasa stand of drawers marked with gold lettering, and full of papers ofvarious sorts.
Sviazhsky took out the books, and sat down in a rocking-chair.
"What are you looking at there?" he said to Levin, who was standing atthe round table looking through the reviews.
"Oh, yes, there’s a very interesting article here," said Sviazhsky ofthe review Levin was holding in his hand. "It appears," he went on, witheager interest, "that Friedrich was not, after all, the person chieflyresponsible for the partition of Poland. It is proved..."
And with his characteristic clearness, he summed up those new, veryimportant, and interesting revelations. Although Levin was engrossed atthe moment by his ideas about the problem of the land, he wondered, ashe heard Sviazhsky: "What is there inside of him? And why, why is heinterested in the partition of Poland?" When Sviazhsky had finished,Levin could not help asking: "Well, and what then?" But there wasnothing to follow. It was simply interesting that it had been proved tobe so and so. But Sviazhsky did not explain, and saw no need to explainwhy it was interesting to him.
"Yes, but I was very much interested by your irritable neighbor," saidLevin, sighing. "He’s a clever fellow, and said a lot that was true."
"Oh, get along with you! An inveterate supporter of serfdom at heart,like all of them!" said Sviazhsky.
"Whose marshal you are."
"Yes, only I marshal them in the other direction," said Sviazhsky,laughing.
"I’ll tell you what interests me very much," said Levin. "He’s rightthat our system, that’s to say of rational farming, doesn’t answer, thatthe only thing that answers is the money-lender system, like thatmeek-looking gentleman’s, or else the very simplest.... Whose fault isit?"
"Our own, of course. Besides, it’s not true that it doesn’t answer. Itanswers with Vassiltchikov."
"A factory..."
"But I really don’t know what it is you are surprised at. The people areat such a low stage of rational and moral development, that it’s obviousthey’re bound to oppose everything that’s strange to them. In Europe, arational system answers because the people are educated; it follows thatwe must educate the people—that’s all."
"But how are we to educate the people?"
"To educate the people three things are needed: schools, and schools,and schools.
"But you said yourself the people are at such a low stage of materialdevelopment: what help are schools for that?"
"Do you know, you remind me of the story of the advice given to the sickman—You should try purgative medicine. Taken: worse. Try leeches. Triedthem: worse. Well, then, there’s nothing left but to pray to God. Triedit: worse. That’s just how it is with us. I say political economy; yousay—worse. I say socialism: worse. Education: worse."
"But how do schools help matters?"
"They give the peasant fresh wants."
"Well, that’s a thing I’ve never understood," Levin replied with heat."In what way are schools going to help the people to improve theirmaterial position? You say schools, education, will give them freshwants. So much the worse, since they won’t be capable of satisfyingthem. And in what way a knowledge of addition and subtraction and thecatechism is going to improve their material condition, I never couldmake out. The day before yesterday, I met a peasant woman in the eveningwith a little baby, and asked her where she was going. She said she wasgoing to the wise woman; her boy had screaming fits, so she was takinghim to be doctored. I asked, ‘Why, how does the wise woman curescreaming fits?’ ‘She puts the child on the hen-roost and repeats somecharm....’"
"Well, you’re saying it yourself! What’s wanted to prevent her takingher child to the hen-roost to cure it of screaming fits is just..."Sviazhsky said, smiling good-humoredly.
"Oh, no!" said Levin with annoyance; "that method of doctoring I merelymeant as a simile for doctoring the people with schools. The people arepoor and ignorant—that we see as surely as the peasant woman sees thebaby is ill because it screams. But in what way this trouble of povertyand ignorance is to be cured by schools is as incomprehensible as howthe hen-roost affects the screaming. What has to be cured is what makeshim poor."
"Well, in that, at least, you’re in agreement with Spencer, whom youdislike so much. He says, too, that education may be the consequence ofgreater prosperity and comfort, of more frequent washing, as he says,but not of being able to read and write..."
"Well, then, I’m very glad—or the contrary, very sorry, that I’m inagreement with Spencer; only I’ve known it a long while. Schools can dono good; what will do good is an economic organization in which thepeople will become richer, will have more leisure—and then there will beschools."
"Still, all over Europe now schools are obligatory."
"And how far do you agree with Spencer yourself about it?" asked Levin.
But there was a gleam of alarm in Sviazhsky’s eyes, and he said smiling:
"No; that screaming story is positively capital! Did you really hear ityourself?"
Levin saw that he was not to discover the connection between this man’slife and his thoughts. Obviously he did not care in the least what hisreasoning led him to; all he wanted was the process of reasoning. And hedid not like it when the process of reasoning brought him into a blindalley. That was the only thing he disliked, and avoided by changing theconversation to something agreeable and amusing.
All the impressions of the day, beginning with the impression made bythe old peasant, which served, as it were, as the fundamental basis ofall the conceptions and ideas of the day, threw Levin into violentexcitement. This dear good Sviazhsky, keeping a stock of ideas simplyfor social purposes, and obviously having some other principles hiddenfrom Levin, while with the crowd, whose name is legion, he guided publicopinion by ideas he did not share; that irascible country gentleman,perfectly correct in the conclusions that he had been worried into bylife, but wrong in his exasperation against a whole class, and that thebest class in Russia; his own dissatisfaction with the work he had beendoing, and the vague hope of finding a remedy for all this—all wasblended in a sense of inward turmoil, and anticipation of some solutionnear at hand.
Left alone in the room assigned him, lying on a spring mattress thatyielded unexpectedly at every movement of his arm or his leg, Levin didnot fall asleep for a long while. Not one conversation with Sviazhsky,though he had said a great deal that was clever, had interested Levin;but the conclusions of the irascible landowner required consideration.Levin could not help recalling every word he had said, and inimagination amending his own replies.
"Yes, I ought to have said to him: You say that our husbandry does notanswer because the peasant hates improvements, and that they must beforced on him by authority. If no system of husbandry answered at allwithout these improvements, you would be quite right. But the onlysystem that does answer is where laborer is working in accordance withhis habits, just as on the old peasant’s land half-way here. Your andour general dissatisfaction with the system shows that either we are toblame or the laborers. We have gone our way—the European way—a longwhile, without asking ourselves about the qualities of our labor force.Let us try to look upon the labor force not as an abstract force, but asthe _Russian peasant_ with his instincts, and we shall arrange oursystem of culture in accordance with that. Imagine, I ought to have saidto him, that you have the same system as the old peasant has, that youhave found means of making your laborers take an interest in the successof the work, and have found the happy mean in the way of improvementswhich they will admit, and you will, without exhausting the soil, gettwice or three times the yield you got before. Divide it in halves, givehalf as the share of labor, the surplus left you will be greater, andthe share of labor will be greater too. And to do this one must lowerthe standard of husbandry and interest the laborers in its success. Howto do this?—that’s a matter of detail; but undoubtedly it can be done."
This idea threw Levin into a great excitement. He did not sleep half thenight, thinking over in detail the putting of his idea into practice. Hehad not intended to go away next day, but he now determined to go homeearly in the morning. Besides, the sister-in-law with her low-neckedbodice aroused in him a feeling akin to shame and remorse for someutterly base action. Most important of all—he must get back withoutdelay: he would have to make haste to put his new project to thepeasants before the sowing of the winter wheat, so that the sowing mightbe undertaken on a new basis. He had made up his mind to revolutionizehis whole system.


Chapter 29

The carrying out of Levin’s plan presented many difficulties; but hestruggled on, doing his utmost, and attained a result which, though notwhat he desired, was enough to enable him, without self-deception, tobelieve that the attempt was worth the trouble. One of the chiefdifficulties was that the process of cultivating the land was in fullswing, that it was impossible to stop everything and begin it all againfrom the beginning, and the machine had to be mended while in motion.
When on the evening that he arrived home he informed the bailiff of hisplans, the latter with visible pleasure agreed with what he said so longas he was pointing out that all that had been done up to that time wasstupid and useless. The bailiff said that he had said so a long whileago, but no heed had been paid him. But as for the proposal made byLevin—to take a part as shareholder with his laborers in eachagricultural undertaking—at this the bailiff simply expressed a profounddespondency, and offered no definite opinion, but began immediatelytalking of the urgent necessity of carrying the remaining sheaves of ryethe next day, and of sending the men out for the second ploughing, sothat Levin felt that this was not the time for discussing it.
On beginning to talk to the peasants about it, and making a propositionto cede them the land on new terms, he came into collision with the samegreat difficulty that they were so much absorbed by the current work ofthe day, that they had not time to consider the advantages anddisadvantages of the proposed scheme.
The simple-hearted Ivan, the cowherd, seemed completely to grasp Levin’sproposal—that he should with his family take a share of the profits ofthe cattle-yard—and he was in complete sympathy with the plan. But whenLevin hinted at the future advantages, Ivan’s face expressed alarm andregret that he could not hear all he had to say, and he made haste tofind himself some task that would admit of no delay: he either snatchedup the fork to pitch the hay out of the pens, or ran to get water or toclear out the dung.
Another difficulty lay in the invincible disbelief of the peasant that alandowner’s object could be anything else than a desire to squeeze allhe could out of them. They were firmly convinced that his real aim(whatever he might say to them) would always be in what he did not sayto them. And they themselves, in giving their opinion, said a great dealbut never said what was their real object. Moreover (Levin felt that theirascible landowner had been right) the peasants made their first andunalterable condition of any agreement whatever that they should not beforced to any new methods of tillage of any kind, nor to use newimplements. They agreed that the modern plough ploughed better, that thescarifier did the work more quickly, but they found thousands of reasonsthat made it out of the question for them to use either of them; andthough he had accepted the conviction that he would have to lower thestandard of cultivation, he felt sorry to give up improved methods, theadvantages of which were so obvious. But in spite of all thesedifficulties he got his way, and by autumn the system was working, or atleast so it seemed to him.
At first Levin had thought of giving up the whole farming of the landjust as it was to the peasants, the laborers, and the bailiff on newconditions of partnership; but he was very soon convinced that this wasimpossible, and determined to divide it up. The cattle-yard, the garden,hay fields, and arable land, divided into several parts, had to be madeinto separate lots. The simple-hearted cowherd, Ivan, who, Levinfancied, understood the matter better than any of them, collectingtogether a gang of workers to help him, principally of his own family,became a partner in the cattle-yard. A distant part of the estate, atract of waste land that had lain fallow for eight years, was with thehelp of the clever carpenter, Fyodor Ryezunov, taken by six families ofpeasants on new conditions of partnership, and the peasant Shuraev tookthe management of all the vegetable gardens on the same terms. Theremainder of the land was still worked on the old system, but thesethree associated partnerships were the first step to a new organizationof the whole, and they completely took up Levin’s time.
It is true that in the cattle-yard things went no better than before,and Ivan strenuously opposed warm housing for the cows and butter madeof fresh cream, affirming that cows require less food if kept cold, andthat butter is more profitable made from sour cream, and he asked forwages just as under the old system, and took not the slightest interestin the fact that the money he received was not wages but an advance outof his future share in the profits.
It is true that Fyodor Ryezunov’s company did not plough over the groundtwice before sowing, as had been agreed, justifying themselves on theplea that the time was too short. It is true that the peasants of thesame company, though they had agreed to work the land on new conditions,always spoke of the land, not as held in partnership, but as rented forhalf the crop, and more than once the peasants and Ryezunov himself saidto Levin, "If you would take a rent for the land, it would save youtrouble, and we should be more free." Moreover the same peasants keptputting off, on various excuses, the building of a cattleyard and barnon the land as agreed upon, and delayed doing it till the winter.
It is true that Shuraev would have liked to let out the kitchen gardenshe had undertaken in small lots to the peasants. He evidently quitemisunderstood, and apparently intentionally misunderstood, theconditions upon which the land had been given to him.
Often, too, talking to the peasants and explaining to them all theadvantages of the plan, Levin felt that the peasants heard nothing butthe sound of his voice, and were firmly resolved, whatever he might say,not to let themselves be taken in. He felt this especially when hetalked to the cleverest of the peasants, Ryezunov, and detected thegleam in Ryezunov’s eyes which showed so plainly both ironical amusementat Levin, and the firm conviction that, if any one were to be taken in,it would not be he, Ryezunov. But in spite of all this Levin thought thesystem worked, and that by keeping accounts strictly and insisting onhis own way, he would prove to them in the future the advantages of thearrangement, and then the system would go of itself.
These matters, together with the management of the land still left onhis hands, and the indoor work over his book, so engrossed Levin thewhole summer that he scarcely ever went out shooting. At the end ofAugust he heard that the Oblonskys had gone away to Moscow, from theirservant who brought back the side-saddle. He felt that in not answeringDarya Alexandrovna’s letter he had by his rudeness, of which he couldnot think without a flush of shame, burned his ships, and that he wouldnever go and see them again. He had been just as rude with theSviazhskys, leaving them without saying good-bye. But he would never goto see them again either. He did not care about that now. The businessof reorganizing the farming of his land absorbed him as completely asthough there would never be anything else in his life. He read the bookslent him by Sviazhsky, and copying out what he had not got, he read boththe economic and socialistic books on the subject, but, as he hadanticipated, found nothing bearing on the scheme he had undertaken. Inthe books on political economy—in Mill, for instance, whom he studiedfirst with great ardor, hoping every minute to find an answer to thequestions that were engrossing him—he found laws deduced from thecondition of land culture in Europe; but he did not see why these laws,which did not apply in Russia, must be general. He saw just the samething in the socialistic books: either they were the beautiful butimpracticable fantasies which had fascinated him when he was a student,or they were attempts at improving, rectifying the economic position inwhich Europe was placed, with which the system of land tenure in Russiahad nothing in common. Political economy told him that the laws by whichthe wealth of Europe had been developed, and was developing, wereuniversal and unvarying. Socialism told him that development along theselines leads to ruin. And neither of them gave an answer, or even a hint,in reply to the question what he, Levin, and all the Russian peasantsand landowners, were to do with their millions of hands and millions ofacres, to make them as productive as possible for the common weal.
Having once taken the subject up, he read conscientiously everythingbearing on it, and intended in the autumn to go abroad to study landsystems on the spot, in order that he might not on this question beconfronted with what so often met him on various subjects. Often, justas he was beginning to understand the idea in the mind of anyone he wastalking to, and was beginning to explain his own, he would suddenly betold: "But Kauffmann, but Jones, but Dubois, but Michelli? You haven’tread them: they’ve thrashed that question out thoroughly."
He saw now distinctly that Kauffmann and Michelli had nothing to tellhim. He knew what he wanted. He saw that Russia has splendid land,splendid laborers, and that in certain cases, as at the peasant’s on theway to Sviazhsky’s, the produce raised by the laborers and the land isgreat—in the majority of cases when capital is applied in the Europeanway the produce is small, and that this simply arises from the fact thatthe laborers want to work and work well only in their own peculiar way,and that this antagonism is not incidental but invariable, and has itsroots in the national spirit. He thought that the Russian people whosetask it was to colonize and cultivate vast tracts of unoccupied land,consciously adhered, till all their land was occupied, to the methodssuitable to their purpose, and that their methods were by no means sobad as was generally supposed. And he wanted to prove this theoreticallyin his book and practically on his land.


Chapter 30

At the end of September the timber had been carted for building thecattleyard on the land that had been allotted to the association ofpeasants, and the butter from the cows was sold and the profits divided.In practice the system worked capitally, or, at least, so it seemed toLevin. In order to work out the whole subject theoretically and tocomplete his book, which, in Levin’s daydreams, was not merely to effecta revolution in political economy, but to annihilate that scienceentirely and to lay the foundation of a new science of the relation ofthe people to the soil, all that was left to do was to make a tourabroad, and to study on the spot all that had been done in the samedirection, and to collect conclusive evidence that all that had beendone there was not what was wanted. Levin was only waiting for thedelivery of his wheat to receive the money for it and go abroad. But therains began, preventing the harvesting of the corn and potatoes left inthe fields, and putting a stop to all work, even to the delivery of thewheat.
The mud was impassable along the roads; two mills were carried away, andthe weather got worse and worse.
On the 30th of September the sun came out in the morning, and hoping forfine weather, Levin began making final preparations for his journey. Hegave orders for the wheat to be delivered, sent the bailiff to themerchant to get the money owing him, and went out himself to give somefinal directions on the estate before setting off.
Having finished all his business, soaked through with the streams ofwater which kept running down the leather behind his neck and hisgaiters, but in the keenest and most confident temper, Levin returnedhomewards in the evening. The weather had become worse than ever towardsevening; the hail lashed the drenched mare so cruelly that she wentalong sideways, shaking her head and ears; but Levin was all right underhis hood, and he looked cheerfully about him at the muddy streamsrunning under the wheels, at the drops hanging on every bare twig, atthe whiteness of the patch of unmelted hailstones on the planks of thebridge, at the thick layer of still juicy, fleshy leaves that lay heapedup about the stripped elm-tree. In spite of the gloominess of naturearound him, he felt peculiarly eager. The talks he had been having withthe peasants in the further village had shown that they were beginningto get used to their new position. The old servant to whose hut he hadgone to get dry evidently approved of Levin’s plan, and of his ownaccord proposed to enter the partnership by the purchase of cattle.
"I have only to go stubbornly on towards my aim, and I shall attain myend," thought Levin; "and it’s something to work and take trouble for.This is not a matter of myself individually; the question of the publicwelfare comes into it. The whole system of culture, the chief element inthe condition of the people, must be completely transformed. Instead ofpoverty, general prosperity and content; instead of hostility, harmonyand unity of interests. In short, a bloodless revolution, but arevolution of the greatest magnitude, beginning in the little circle ofour district, then the province, then Russia, the whole world. Because ajust idea cannot but be fruitful. Yes, it’s an aim worth working for.And its being me, Kostya Levin, who went to a ball in a black tie, andwas refused by the Shtcherbatskaya girl, and who was intrinsically sucha pitiful, worthless creature—that proves nothing; I feel sure Franklinfelt just as worthless, and he too had no faith in himself, thinking ofhimself as a whole. That means nothing. And he too, most likely, had anAgafea Mihalovna to whom he confided his secrets."
Musing on such thoughts Levin reached home in the darkness.
The bailiff, who had been to the merchant, had come back and broughtpart of the money for the wheat. An agreement had been made with the oldservant, and on the road the bailiff had learned that everywhere thecorn was still standing in the fields, so that his one hundred and sixtyshocks that had not been carried were nothing in comparison with thelosses of others.
After dinner Levin was sitting, as he usually did, in an easy chair witha book, and as he read he went on thinking of the journey before him inconnection with his book. Today all the significance of his book rosebefore him with special distinctness, and whole periods rangedthemselves in his mind in illustration of his theories. "I must writethat down," he thought. "That ought to form a brief introduction, whichI thought unnecessary before." He got up to go to his writing table, andLaska, lying at his feet, got up too, stretching and looking at him asthough to inquire where to go. But he had not time to write it down, forthe head peasants had come round, and Levin went out into the hall tothem.
After his levee, that is to say, giving directions about the labors ofthe next day, and seeing all the peasants who had business with him,Levin went back to his study and sat down to work.
Laska lay under the table; Agafea Mihalovna settled herself in her placewith her stocking.
After writing for a little while, Levin suddenly thought withexceptional vividness of Kitty, her refusal, and their last meeting. Hegot up and began walking about the room.
"What’s the use of being dreary?" said Agafea Mihalovna. "Come, why doyou stay on at home? You ought to go to some warm springs, especiallynow you’re ready for the journey."
"Well, I am going away the day after tomorrow, Agafea Mihalovna; I mustfinish my work."
"There, there, your work, you say! As if you hadn’t done enough for thepeasants! Why, as ’tis, they’re saying, ‘Your master will be gettingsome honor from the Tsar for it.’ Indeed and it is a strange thing; whyneed you worry about the peasants?"
"I’m not worrying about them; I’m doing it for my own good."
Agafea Mihalovna knew every detail of Levin’s plans for his land. Levinoften put his views before her in all their complexity, and notuncommonly he argued with her and did not agree with her comments. Buton this occasion she entirely misinterpreted what he had said.
"Of one’s soul’s salvation we all know and must think before all else,"she said with a sigh. "Parfen Denisitch now, for all he was no scholar,he died a death that God grant every one of us the like," she said,referring to a servant who had died recently. "Took the sacrament andall."
"That’s not what I mean," said he. "I mean that I’m acting for my ownadvantage. It’s all the better for me if the peasants do their workbetter."
"Well, whatever you do, if he’s a lazy good-for-nought, everything’ll beat sixes and sevens. If he has a conscience, he’ll work, and if not,there’s no doing anything."
"Oh, come, you say yourself Ivan has begun looking after the cattlebetter."
"All I say is," answered Agafea Mihalovna, evidently not speaking atrandom, but in strict sequence of idea, "that you ought to get married,that’s what I say."
Agafea Mihalovna’s allusion to the very subject he had only just beenthinking about, hurt and stung him. Levin scowled, and without answeringher, he sat down again to his work, repeating to himself all that he hadbeen thinking of the real significance of that work. Only at intervalshe listened in the stillness to the click of Agafea Mihalovna’s needles,and recollecting what he did not want to remember, he frowned again.
At nine o’clock they heard the bell and the faint vibration of acarriage over the mud.
"Well, here’s visitors come to us, and you won’t be dull," said AgafeaMihalovna, getting up and going to the door. But Levin overtook her. Hiswork was not going well now, and he was glad of a visitor, whoever itmight be.


Chapter 31

Running halfway down the staircase, Levin caught a sound he knew, afamiliar cough in the hall. But he heard it indistinctly through thesound of his own footsteps, and hoped he was mistaken. Then he caughtsight of a long, bony, familiar figure, and now it seemed there was nopossibility of mistake; and yet he still went on hoping that this tallman taking off his fur cloak and coughing was not his brother Nikolay.
Levin loved his brother, but being with him was always a torture. Justnow, when Levin, under the influence of the thoughts that had come tohim, and Agafea Mihalovna’s hint, was in a troubled and uncertain humor,the meeting with his brother that he had to face seemed particularlydifficult. Instead of a lively, healthy visitor, some outsider whowould, he hoped, cheer him up in his uncertain humor, he had to see hisbrother, who knew him through and through, who would call forth all thethoughts nearest his heart, would force him to show himself fully. Andthat he was not disposed to do.
Angry with himself for so base a feeling, Levin ran into the hall; assoon as he had seen his brother close, this feeling of selfishdisappointment vanished instantly and was replaced by pity. Terrible ashis brother Nikolay had been before in his emaciation and sickliness,now he looked still more emaciated, still more wasted. He was a skeletoncovered with skin.
He stood in the hall, jerking his long thin neck, and pulling the scarfoff it, and smiled a strange and pitiful smile. When he saw that smile,submissive and humble, Levin felt something clutching at his throat.
"You see, I’ve come to you," said Nikolay in a thick voice, never forone second taking his eyes off his brother’s face. "I’ve been meaning toa long while, but I’ve been unwell all the time. Now I’m ever so muchbetter," he said, rubbing his beard with his big thin hands.
"Yes, yes!" answered Levin. And he felt still more frightened when,kissing him, he felt with his lips the dryness of his brother’s skin andsaw close to him his big eyes, full of a strange light.
A few weeks before, Konstantin Levin had written to his brother thatthrough the sale of the small part of the property, that had remainedundivided, there was a sum of about two thousand roubles to come to himas his share.
Nikolay said that he had come now to take this money and, what was moreimportant, to stay a while in the old nest, to get in touch with theearth, so as to renew his strength like the heroes of old for the workthat lay before him. In spite of his exaggerated stoop, and theemaciation that was so striking from his height, his movements were asrapid and abrupt as ever. Levin led him into his study.
His brother dressed with particular care—a thing he never used todo—combed his scanty, lank hair, and, smiling, went upstairs.
He was in the most affectionate and good-humored mood, just as Levinoften remembered him in childhood. He even referred to Sergey Ivanovitchwithout rancor. When he saw Agafea Mihalovna, he made jokes with her andasked after the old servants. The news of the death of Parfen Denisitchmade a painful impression on him. A look of fear crossed his face, buthe regained his serenity immediately.
"Of course he was quite old," he said, and changed the subject. "Well,I’ll spend a month or two with you, and then I’m off to Moscow. Do youknow, Myakov has promised me a place there, and I’m going into theservice. Now I’m going to arrange my life quite differently," he wenton. "You know I got rid of that woman."
"Marya Nikolaevna? Why, what for?"
"Oh, she was a horrid woman! She caused me all sorts of worries." But hedid not say what the annoyances were. He could not say that he had castoff Marya Nikolaevna because the tea was weak, and, above all, becauseshe would look after him, as though he were an invalid.
"Besides, I want to turn over a new leaf completely now. I’ve done sillythings, of course, like everyone else, but money’s the lastconsideration; I don’t regret it. So long as there’s health, and myhealth, thank God, is quite restored."
Levin listened and racked his brains, but could think of nothing to say.Nikolay probably felt the same; he began questioning his brother abouthis affairs; and Levin was glad to talk about himself, because then hecould speak without hypocrisy. He told his brother of his plans and hisdoings.
His brother listened, but evidently he was not interested by it.
These two men were so akin, so near each other, that the slightestgesture, the tone of voice, told both more than could be said in words.
Both of them now had only one thought—the illness of Nikolay and thenearness of his death—which stifled all else. But neither of them daredto speak of it, and so whatever they said—not uttering the one thoughtthat filled their minds—was all falsehood. Never had Levin been so gladwhen the evening was over and it was time to go to bed. Never with anyoutside person, never on any official visit had he been so unnatural andfalse as he was that evening. And the consciousness of thisunnaturalness, and the remorse he felt at it, made him even moreunnatural. He wanted to weep over his dying, dearly loved brother, andhe had to listen and keep on talking of how he meant to live.
As the house was damp, and only one bedroom had been kept heated, Levinput his brother to sleep in his own bedroom behind a screen.
His brother got into bed, and whether he slept or did not sleep, tossedabout like a sick man, coughed, and when he could not get his throatclear, mumbled something. Sometimes when his breathing was painful, hesaid, "Oh, my God!" Sometimes when he was choking he muttered angrily,"Ah, the devil!" Levin could not sleep for a long while, hearing him.His thoughts were of the most various, but the end of all his thoughtswas the same—death. Death, the inevitable end of all, for the first timepresented itself to him with irresistible force. And death, which washere in this loved brother, groaning half asleep and from habit callingwithout distinction on God and the devil, was not so remote as it hadhitherto seemed to him. It was in himself too, he felt that. If nottoday, tomorrow, if not tomorrow, in thirty years, wasn’t it all thesame! And what was this inevitable death—he did not know, had neverthought about it, and what was more, had not the power, had not thecourage to think about it.
"I work, I want to do something, but I had forgotten it must all end; Ihad forgotten—death."
He sat on his bed in the darkness, crouched up, hugging his knees, andholding his breath from the strain of thought, he pondered. But the moreintensely he thought, the clearer it became to him that it wasindubitably so, that in reality, looking upon life, he had forgotten onelittle fact—that death will come, and all ends; that nothing was evenworth beginning, and that there was no helping it anyway. Yes, it wasawful, but it was so.
"But I am alive still. Now what’s to be done? what’s to be done?" hesaid in despair. He lighted a candle, got up cautiously and went to thelooking-glass, and began looking at his face and hair. Yes, there weregray hairs about his temples. He opened his mouth. His back teeth werebeginning to decay. He bared his muscular arms. Yes, there was strengthin them. But Nikolay, who lay there breathing with what was left oflungs, had had a strong, healthy body too. And suddenly he recalled howthey used to go to bed together as children, and how they only waitedtill Fyodor Bogdanitch was out of the room to fling pillows at eachother and laugh, laugh irrepressibly, so that even their awe of FyodorBogdanitch could not check the effervescing, overbrimming sense of lifeand happiness. "And now that bent, hollow chest ... and I, not knowingwhat will become of me, or wherefore..."
"K...ha! K...ha! Damnation! Why do you keep fidgeting, why don’t you goto sleep?" his brother’s voice called to him.
"Oh, I don’t know, I’m not sleepy."
"I have had a good sleep, I’m not in a sweat now. Just see, feel myshirt; it’s not wet, is it?"
Levin felt, withdrew behind the screen, and put out the candle, but fora long while he could not sleep. The question how to live had hardlybegun to grow a little clearer to him, when a new, insoluble questionpresented itself—death.
"Why, he’s dying—yes, he’ll die in the spring, and how help him? Whatcan I say to him? What do I know about it? I’d even forgotten that itwas at all."


Chapter 32

Levin had long before made the observation that when one isuncomfortable with people from their being excessively amenable andmeek, one is apt very soon after to find things intolerable from theirtouchiness and irritability. He felt that this was how it would be withhis brother. And his brother Nikolay’s gentleness did in fact not lastout for long. The very next morning he began to be irritable, and seemeddoing his best to find fault with his brother, attacking him on histenderest points.
Levin felt himself to blame, and could not set things right. He feltthat if they had both not kept up appearances, but had spoken, as it iscalled, from the heart—that is to say, had said only just what they werethinking and feeling—they would simply have looked into each other’sfaces, and Konstantin could only have said, "You’re dying, you’redying!" and Nikolay could only have answered, "I know I’m dying, but I’mafraid, I’m afraid, I’m afraid!" And they could have said nothing more,if they had said only what was in their hearts. But life like that wasimpossible, and so Konstantin tried to do what he had been trying to doall his life, and never could learn to do, though, as far as he couldobserve, many people knew so well how to do it, and without it there wasno living at all. He tried to say what he was not thinking, but he feltcontinually that it had a ring of falsehood, that his brother detectedhim in it, and was exasperated at it.
The third day Nikolay induced his brother to explain his plan to himagain, and began not merely attacking it, but intentionally confoundingit with communism.
"You’ve simply borrowed an idea that’s not your own, but you’vedistorted it, and are trying to apply it where it’s not applicable."
"But I tell you it’s nothing to do with it. They deny the justice ofproperty, of capital, of inheritance, while I do not deny this chiefstimulus." (Levin felt disgusted himself at using such expressions, butever since he had been engrossed by his work, he had unconsciously comemore and more frequently to use words not Russian.) "All I want is toregulate labor."
"Which means, you’ve borrowed an idea, stripped it of all that gave itits force, and want to make believe that it’s something new," saidNikolay, angrily tugging at his necktie.
"But my idea has nothing in common..."
"That, anyway," said Nikolay Levin, with an ironical smile, his eyesflashing malignantly, "has the charm of—what’s one to callit?—geometrical symmetry, of clearness, of definiteness. It may be aUtopia. But if once one allows the possibility of making of all the pasta _tabula rasa_—no property, no family—then labor would organize itself.But you gain nothing..."
"Why do you mix things up? I’ve never been a communist."
"But I have, and I consider it’s premature, but rational, and it has afuture, just like Christianity in its first ages."
"All that I maintain is that the labor force ought to be investigatedfrom the point of view of natural science; that is to say, it ought tobe studied, its qualities ascertained..."
"But that’s utter waste of time. That force finds a certain form ofactivity of itself, according to the stage of its development. Therehave been slaves first everywhere, then metayers; and we have thehalf-crop system, rent, and day laborers. What are you trying to find?"
Levin suddenly lost his temper at these words, because at the bottom ofhis heart he was afraid that it was true—true that he was trying to holdthe balance even between communism and the familiar forms, and that thiswas hardly possible.
"I am trying to find means of working productively for myself and forthe laborers. I want to organize..." he answered hotly.
"You don’t want to organize anything; it’s simply just as you’ve beenall your life, that you want to be original to pose as not exploitingthe peasants simply, but with some idea in view."
"Oh, all right, that’s what you think—and let me alone!" answered Levin,feeling the muscles of his left cheek twitching uncontrollably.
"You’ve never had, and never have, convictions; all you want is toplease your vanity."
"Oh, very well; then let me alone!"
"And I will let you alone! and it’s high time I did, and go to the devilwith you! and I’m very sorry I ever came!"
In spite of all Levin’s efforts to soothe his brother afterwards,Nikolay would listen to nothing he said, declaring that it was better topart, and Konstantin saw that it simply was that life was unbearable tohim.
Nikolay was just getting ready to go, when Konstantin went in to himagain and begged him, rather unnaturally, to forgive him if he had hurthis feelings in any way.
"Ah, generosity!" said Nikolay, and he smiled. "If you want to be right,I can give you that satisfaction. You’re in the right; but I’m going allthe same."
It was only just at parting that Nikolay kissed him, and said, lookingwith sudden strangeness and seriousness at his brother:
"Anyway, don’t remember evil against me, Kostya!" and his voicequivered. These were the only words that had been spoken sincerelybetween them. Levin knew that those words meant, "You see, and you know,that I’m in a bad way, and maybe we shall not see each other again."Levin knew this, and the tears gushed from his eyes. He kissed hisbrother once more, but he could not speak, and knew not what to say.
Three days after his brother’s departure, Levin too set off for hisforeign tour. Happening to meet Shtcherbatsky, Kitty’s cousin, in therailway train, Levin greatly astonished him by his depression.
"What’s the matter with you?" Shtcherbatsky asked him.
"Oh, nothing; there’s not much happiness in life."
"Not much? You come with me to Paris instead of to Mulhausen. You shallsee how to be happy."
"No, I’ve done with it all. It’s time I was dead."
"Well, that’s a good one!" said Shtcherbatsky, laughing; "why, I’m onlyjust getting ready to begin."
"Yes, I thought the same not long ago, but now I know I shall soon bedead."
Levin said what he had genuinely been thinking of late. He saw nothingbut death or the advance towards death in everything. But his cherishedscheme only engrossed him the more. Life had to be got through somehowtill death did come. Darkness had fallen upon everything for him; butjust because of this darkness he felt that the one guiding clue in thedarkness was his work, and he clutched it and clung to it with all hisstrength.



PART FOUR


Chapter 1

The Karenins, husband and wife, continued living in the same house, metevery day, but were complete strangers to one another. AlexeyAlexandrovitch made it a rule to see his wife every day, so that theservants might have no grounds for suppositions, but avoided dining athome. Vronsky was never at Alexey Alexandrovitch’s house, but Anna sawhim away from home, and her husband was aware of it.
The position was one of misery for all three; and not one of them wouldhave been equal to enduring this position for a single day, if it hadnot been for the expectation that it would change, that it was merely atemporary painful ordeal which would pass over. Alexey Alexandrovitchhoped that this passion would pass, as everything does pass, thateveryone would forget about it, and his name would remain unsullied.Anna, on whom the position depended, and for whom it was more miserablethan for anyone, endured it because she not merely hoped, but firmlybelieved, that it would all very soon be settled and come right. She hadnot the least idea what would settle the position, but she firmlybelieved that something would very soon turn up now. Vronsky, againsthis own will or wishes, followed her lead, hoped too that something,apart from his own action, would be sure to solve all difficulties.
In the middle of the winter Vronsky spent a very tiresome week. Aforeign prince, who had come on a visit to Petersburg, was put under hischarge, and he had to show him the sights worth seeing. Vronsky was ofdistinguished appearance; he possessed, moreover, the art of behavingwith respectful dignity, and was used to having to do with such grandpersonages—that was how he came to be put in charge of the prince. Buthe felt his duties very irksome. The prince was anxious to miss nothingof which he would be asked at home, had he seen that in Russia? And onhis own account he was anxious to enjoy to the utmost all Russian formsof amusement. Vronsky was obliged to be his guide in satisfying boththese inclinations. The mornings they spent driving to look at places ofinterest; the evenings they passed enjoying the national entertainments.The prince rejoiced in health exceptional even among princes. Bygymnastics and careful attention to his health he had brought himself tosuch a point that in spite of his excess in pleasure he looked as freshas a big glossy green Dutch cucumber. The prince had traveled a greatdeal, and considered one of the chief advantages of modern facilities ofcommunication was the accessibility of the pleasures of all nations.
He had been in Spain, and there had indulged in serenades and had madefriends with a Spanish girl who played the mandolin. In Switzerland hehad killed chamois. In England he had galloped in a red coat over hedgesand killed two hundred pheasants for a bet. In Turkey he had got into aharem; in India he had hunted on an elephant, and now in Russia hewished to taste all the specially Russian forms of pleasure.
Vronsky, who was, as it were, chief master of the ceremonies to him, wasat great pains to arrange all the Russian amusements suggested byvarious persons to the prince. They had race horses, and Russianpancakes and bear hunts and three-horse sledges, and gypsies anddrinking feasts, with the Russian accompaniment of broken crockery. Andthe prince with surprising ease fell in with the Russian spirit, smashedtrays full of crockery, sat with a gypsy girl on his knee, and seemed tobe asking—what more, and does the whole Russian spirit consist in justthis?
In reality, of all the Russian entertainments the prince liked bestFrench actresses and ballet dancers and white-seal champagne. Vronskywas used to princes, but, either because he had himself changed of late,or that he was in too close proximity to the prince, that week seemedfearfully wearisome to him. The whole of that week he experienced asensation such as a man might have set in charge of a dangerous madman,afraid of the madman, and at the same time, from being with him, fearingfor his own reason. Vronsky was continually conscious of the necessityof never for a second relaxing the tone of stern officialrespectfulness, that he might not himself be insulted. The prince’smanner of treating the very people who, to Vronsky’s surprise, wereready to descend to any depths to provide him with Russian amusements,was contemptuous. His criticisms of Russian women, whom he wished tostudy, more than once made Vronsky crimson with indignation. The chiefreason why the prince was so particularly disagreeable to Vronsky wasthat he could not help seeing himself in him. And what he saw in thismirror did not gratify his self-esteem. He was a very stupid and veryself-satisfied and very healthy and very well-washed man, and nothingelse. He was a gentleman—that was true, and Vronsky could not deny it.He was equable and not cringing with his superiors, was free andingratiating in his behavior with his equals, and was contemptuouslyindulgent with his inferiors. Vronsky was himself the same, and regardedit as a great merit to be so. But for this prince he was an inferior,and his contemptuous and indulgent attitude to him revolted him.
"Brainless beef! can I be like that?" he thought.
Be that as it might, when, on the seventh day, he parted from theprince, who was starting for Moscow, and received his thanks, he washappy to be rid of his uncomfortable position and the unpleasantreflection of himself. He said good-bye to him at the station on theirreturn from a bear hunt, at which they had had a display of Russianprowess kept up all night.


Chapter 2

When he got home, Vronsky found there a note from Anna. She wrote, "I amill and unhappy. I cannot come out, but I cannot go on longer withoutseeing you. Come in this evening. Alexey Alexandrovitch goes to thecouncil at seven and will be there till ten." Thinking for an instant ofthe strangeness of her bidding him come straight to her, in spite of herhusband’s insisting on her not receiving him, he decided to go.
Vronsky had that winter got his promotion, was now a colonel, had leftthe regimental quarters, and was living alone. After having some lunch,he lay down on the sofa immediately, and in five minutes memories of thehideous scenes he had witnessed during the last few days were confusedtogether and joined on to a mental image of Anna and of the peasant whohad played an important part in the bear hunt, and Vronsky fell asleep.He waked up in the dark, trembling with horror, and made haste to lighta candle. "What was it? What? What was the dreadful thing I dreamed?Yes, yes; I think a little dirty man with a disheveled beard wasstooping down doing something, and all of a sudden he began saying somestrange words in French. Yes, there was nothing else in the dream," hesaid to himself. "But why was it so awful?" He vividly recalled thepeasant again and those incomprehensible French words the peasant haduttered, and a chill of horror ran down his spine.
"What nonsense!" thought Vronsky, and glanced at his watch.
It was half-past eight already. He rang up his servant, dressed inhaste, and went out onto the steps, completely forgetting the dream andonly worried at being late. As he drove up to the Karenins’ entrance helooked at his watch and saw it was ten minutes to nine. A high, narrowcarriage with a pair of grays was standing at the entrance. Herecognized Anna’s carriage. "She is coming to me," thought Vronsky, "andbetter she should. I don’t like going into that house. But no matter; Ican’t hide myself," he thought, and with that manner peculiar to himfrom childhood, as of a man who has nothing to be ashamed of, Vronskygot out of his sledge and went to the door. The door opened, and thehall porter with a rug on his arm called the carriage. Vronsky, thoughhe did not usually notice details, noticed at this moment the amazedexpression with which the porter glanced at him. In the very doorwayVronsky almost ran up against Alexey Alexandrovitch. The gas jet threwits full light on the bloodless, sunken face under the black hat and onthe white cravat, brilliant against the beaver of the coat. Karenin’sfixed, dull eyes were fastened upon Vronsky’s face. Vronsky bowed, andAlexey Alexandrovitch, chewing his lips, lifted his hand to his hat andwent on. Vronsky saw him without looking round get into the carriage,pick up the rug and the opera-glass at the window and disappear. Vronskywent into the hall. His brows were scowling, and his eyes gleamed with aproud and angry light in them.
"What a position!" he thought. "If he would fight, would stand up forhis honor, I could act, could express my feelings; but this weakness orbaseness.... He puts me in the position of playing false, which I nevermeant and never mean to do."
Vronsky’s ideas had changed since the day of his conversation with Annain the Vrede garden. Unconsciously yielding to the weakness of Anna—whohad surrendered herself up to him utterly, and simply looked to him todecide her fate, ready to submit to anything—he had long ceased to thinkthat their tie might end as he had thought then. His ambitious plans hadretreated into the background again, and feeling that he had got out ofthat circle of activity in which everything was definite, he had givenhimself entirely to his passion, and that passion was binding him moreand more closely to her.
He was still in the hall when he caught the sound of her retreatingfootsteps. He knew she had been expecting him, had listened for him, andwas now going back to the drawing room.
"No," she cried, on seeing him, and at the first sound of her voice thetears came into her eyes. "No; if things are to go on like this, the endwill come much, much too soon."
"What is it, dear one?"
"What? I’ve been waiting in agony for an hour, two hours ... No, I won’t... I can’t quarrel with you. Of course you couldn’t come. No, I won’t."She laid her two hands on his shoulders, and looked a long while at himwith a profound, passionate, and at the same time searching look. Shewas studying his face to make up for the time she had not seen him. Shewas, every time she saw him, making the picture of him in herimagination (incomparably superior, impossible in reality) fit with himas he really was.


Chapter 3

"You met him?" she asked, when they had sat down at the table in thelamplight. "You’re punished, you see, for being late."
"Yes; but how was it? Wasn’t he to be at the council?"
"He had been and come back, and was going out somewhere again. Butthat’s no matter. Don’t talk about it. Where have you been? With theprince still?"
She knew every detail of his existence. He was going to say that he hadbeen up all night and had dropped asleep, but looking at her thrilledand rapturous face, he was ashamed. And he said he had had to go toreport on the prince’s departure.
"But it’s over now? He is gone?"
"Thank God it’s over! You wouldn’t believe how insufferable it’s beenfor me."
"Why so? Isn’t it the life all of you, all young men, always lead?" shesaid, knitting her brows; and taking up the crochet work that was lyingon the table, she began drawing the hook out of it, without looking atVronsky.
"I gave that life up long ago," said he, wondering at the change in herface, and trying to divine its meaning. "And I confess," he said, with asmile, showing his thick, white teeth, "this week I’ve been, as it were,looking at myself in a glass, seeing that life, and I didn’t like it."
She held the work in her hands, but did not crochet, and looked at himwith strange, shining, and hostile eyes.
"This morning Liza came to see me—they’re not afraid to call on me, inspite of the Countess Lidia Ivanovna," she put in—"and she told me aboutyour Athenian evening. How loathsome!"
"I was just going to say..."
She interrupted him. "It was that Thèrése you used to know?"
"I was just saying..."
"How disgusting you are, you men! How is it you can’t understand that awoman can never forget that," she said, getting more and more angry, andso letting him see the cause of her irritation, "especially a woman whocannot know your life? What do I know? What have I ever known?" shesaid, "what you tell me. And how do I know whether you tell me thetruth?..."
"Anna, you hurt me. Don’t you trust me? Haven’t I told you that Ihaven’t a thought I wouldn’t lay bare to you?"
"Yes, yes," she said, evidently trying to suppress her jealous thoughts."But if only you knew how wretched I am! I believe you, I believeyou.... What were you saying?"
But he could not at once recall what he had been going to say. Thesefits of jealousy, which of late had been more and more frequent withher, horrified him, and however much he tried to disguise the fact, madehim feel cold to her, although he knew the cause of her jealousy was herlove for him. How often he had told himself that her love was happiness;and now she loved him as a woman can love when love has outweighed forher all the good things of life—and he was much further from happinessthan when he had followed her from Moscow. Then he had thought himselfunhappy, but happiness was before him; now he felt that the besthappiness was already left behind. She was utterly unlike what she hadbeen when he first saw her. Both morally and physically she had changedfor the worse. She had broadened out all over, and in her face at thetime when she was speaking of the actress there was an evil expressionof hatred that distorted it. He looked at her as a man looks at a fadedflower he has gathered, with difficulty recognizing in it the beauty forwhich he picked and ruined it. And in spite of this he felt that then,when his love was stronger, he could, if he had greatly wished it, havetorn that love out of his heart; but now, when as at that moment itseemed to him he felt no love for her, he knew that what bound him toher could not be broken.
"Well, well, what was it you were going to say about the prince? I havedriven away the fiend," she added. The fiend was the name they had givenher jealousy. "What did you begin to tell me about the prince? Why didyou find it so tiresome?"
"Oh, it was intolerable!" he said, trying to pick up the thread of hisinterrupted thought. "He does not improve on closer acquaintance. If youwant him defined, here he is: a prime, well-fed beast such as takesmedals at the cattle shows, and nothing more," he said, with a tone ofvexation that interested her.
"No; how so?" she replied. "He’s seen a great deal, anyway; he’scultured?"
"It’s an utterly different culture—their culture. He’s cultivated, onesees, simply to be able to despise culture, as they despise everythingbut animal pleasures."
"But don’t you all care for these animal pleasures?" she said, and againhe noticed a dark look in her eyes that avoided him.
"How is it you’re defending him?" he said, smiling.
"I’m not defending him, it’s nothing to me; but I imagine, if you hadnot cared for those pleasures yourself, you might have got out of them.But if it affords you satisfaction to gaze at Thèrése in the attire ofEve..."
"Again, the devil again," Vronsky said, taking the hand she had laid onthe table and kissing it.
"Yes; but I can’t help it. You don’t know what I have suffered waitingfor you. I believe I’m not jealous. I’m not jealous: I believe you whenyou’re here; but when you’re away somewhere leading your life, soincomprehensible to me..."
She turned away from him, pulled the hook at last out of the crochetwork, and rapidly, with the help of her forefinger, began working loopafter loop of the wool that was dazzling white in the lamplight, whilethe slender wrist moved swiftly, nervously in the embroidered cuff.
"How was it, then? Where did you meet Alexey Alexandrovitch?" Her voicesounded in an unnatural and jarring tone.
"We ran up against each other in the doorway."
"And he bowed to you like this?"
She drew a long face, and half-closing her eyes, quickly transformed herexpression, folded her hands, and Vronsky suddenly saw in her beautifulface the very expression with which Alexey Alexandrovitch had bowed tohim. He smiled, while she laughed gaily, with that sweet, deep laugh,which was one of her greatest charms.
"I don’t understand him in the least," said Vronsky. "If after youravowal to him at your country house he had broken with you, if he hadcalled me out—but this I can’t understand. How can he put up with such aposition? He feels it, that’s evident."
"He?" she said sneeringly. "He’s perfectly satisfied."
"What are we all miserable for, when everything might be so happy?"
"Only not he. Don’t I know him, the falsity in which he’s utterlysteeped?... Could one, with any feeling, live as he is living with me?He understands nothing, and feels nothing. Could a man of any feelinglive in the same house with his unfaithful wife? Could he talk to her,call her ‘my dear’?"
And again she could not help mimicking him: "‘Anna, _ma chère_; Anna,dear’!"
"He’s not a man, not a human being—he’s a doll! No one knows him; but Iknow him. Oh, if I’d been in his place, I’d long ago have killed, havetorn to pieces a wife like me. I wouldn’t have said, ‘Anna, _ma chère_’!He’s not a man, he’s an official machine. He doesn’t understand that I’myour wife, that he’s outside, that he’s superfluous.... Don’t let’s talkof him!..."
"You’re unfair, very unfair, dearest," said Vronsky, trying to sootheher. "But never mind, don’t let’s talk of him. Tell me what you’ve beendoing? What is the matter? What has been wrong with you, and what didthe doctor say?"
She looked at him with mocking amusement. Evidently she had hit on otherabsurd and grotesque aspects in her husband and was awaiting the momentto give expression to them.
But he went on:
"I imagine that it’s not illness, but your condition. When will it be?"
The ironical light died away in her eyes, but a different smile, aconsciousness of something, he did not know what, and of quietmelancholy, came over her face.
"Soon, soon. You say that our position is miserable, that we must put anend to it. If you knew how terrible it is to me, what I would give to beable to love you freely and boldly! I should not torture myself andtorture you with my jealousy.... And it will come soon, but not as weexpect."
And at the thought of how it would come, she seemed so pitiable toherself that tears came into her eyes, and she could not go on. She laidher hand on his sleeve, dazzling and white with its rings in thelamplight.
"It won’t come as we suppose. I didn’t mean to say this to you, butyou’ve made me. Soon, soon, all will be over, and we shall all, all beat peace, and suffer no more."
"I don’t understand," he said, understanding her.
"You asked when? Soon. And I shan’t live through it. Don’t interruptme!" and she made haste to speak. "I know it; I know for certain. Ishall die; and I’m very glad I shall die, and release myself and you."
Tears dropped from her eyes; he bent down over her hand and begankissing it, trying to hide his emotion, which, he knew, had no sort ofgrounds, though he could not control it.
"Yes, it’s better so," she said, tightly gripping his hand. "That’s theonly way, the only way left us."
He had recovered himself, and lifted his head.
"How absurd! What absurd nonsense you are talking!"
"No, it’s the truth."
"What, what’s the truth?"
"That I shall die. I have had a dream."
"A dream?" repeated Vronsky, and instantly he recalled the peasant ofhis dream.
"Yes, a dream," she said. "It’s a long while since I dreamed it. Idreamed that I ran into my bedroom, that I had to get something there,to find out something; you know how it is in dreams," she said, her eyeswide with horror; "and in the bedroom, in the corner, stood something."
"Oh, what nonsense! How can you believe..."
But she would not let him interrupt her. What she was saying was tooimportant to her.
"And the something turned round, and I saw it was a peasant with adisheveled beard, little, and dreadful looking. I wanted to run away,but he bent down over a sack, and was fumbling there with his hands..."
She showed how he had moved his hands. There was terror in her face. AndVronsky, remembering his dream, felt the same terror filling his soul.
"He was fumbling and kept talking quickly, quickly in French, you know:_Il faut le battre, le fer, le brayer, le pétrir_.... And in my horror Itried to wake up, and woke up ... but woke up in the dream. And I beganasking myself what it meant. And Korney said to me: ‘In childbirthyou’ll die, ma’am, you’ll die....’ And I woke up."
"What nonsense, what nonsense!" said Vronsky; but he felt himself thatthere was no conviction in his voice.
"But don’t let’s talk of it. Ring the bell, I’ll have tea. And stay alittle now; it’s not long I shall..."
But all at once she stopped. The expression of her face instantaneouslychanged. Horror and excitement were suddenly replaced by a look of soft,solemn, blissful attention. He could not comprehend the meaning of thechange. She was listening to the stirring of the new life within her.


Chapter 4

Alexey Alexandrovitch, after meeting Vronsky on his own steps, drove, ashe had intended, to the Italian opera. He sat through two acts there,and saw everyone he had wanted to see. On returning home, he carefullyscrutinized the hat stand, and noticing that there was not a militaryovercoat there, he went, as usual, to his own room. But, contrary to hisusual habit, he did not go to bed, he walked up and down his study tillthree o’clock in the morning. The feeling of furious anger with hiswife, who would not observe the proprieties and keep to the onestipulation he had laid on her, not to receive her lover in her ownhome, gave him no peace. She had not complied with his request, and hewas bound to punish her and carry out his threat—obtain a divorce andtake away his son. He knew all the difficulties connected with thiscourse, but he had said he would do it, and now he must carry out histhreat. Countess Lidia Ivanovna had hinted that this was the best wayout of his position, and of late the obtaining of divorces had beenbrought to such perfection that Alexey Alexandrovitch saw a possibilityof overcoming the formal difficulties. Misfortunes never come singly,and the affairs of the reorganization of the native tribes, and of theirrigation of the lands of the Zaraisky province, had brought suchofficial worries upon Alexey Alexandrovitch that he had been of late ina continual condition of extreme irritability.
He did not sleep the whole night, and his fury, growing in a sort ofvast, arithmetical progression, reached its highest limits in themorning. He dressed in haste, and as though carrying his cup full ofwrath, and fearing to spill any over, fearing to lose with his wrath theenergy necessary for the interview with his wife, he went into her roomdirectly he heard she was up.
Anna, who had thought she knew her husband so well, was amazed at hisappearance when he went in to her. His brow was lowering, and his eyesstared darkly before him, avoiding her eyes; his mouth was tightly andcontemptuously shut. In his walk, in his gestures, in the sound of hisvoice there was a determination and firmness such as his wife had neverseen in him. He went into her room, and without greeting her, walkedstraight up to her writing-table, and taking her keys, opened a drawer.
"What do you want?" she cried.
"Your lover’s letters," he said.
"They’re not here," she said, shutting the drawer; but from that actionhe saw he had guessed right, and roughly pushing away her hand, hequickly snatched a portfolio in which he knew she used to put her mostimportant papers. She tried to pull the portfolio away, but he pushedher back.
"Sit down! I have to speak to you," he said, putting the portfolio underhis arm, and squeezing it so tightly with his elbow that his shoulderstood up. Amazed and intimidated, she gazed at him in silence.
"I told you that I would not allow you to receive your lover in thishouse."
"I had to see him to..."
She stopped, not finding a reason.
"I do not enter into the details of why a woman wants to see her lover."
"I meant, I only..." she said, flushing hotly. This coarseness of hisangered her, and gave her courage. "Surely you must feel how easy it isfor you to insult me?" she said.
"An honest man and an honest woman may be insulted, but to tell a thiefhe’s a thief is simply _la constatation d’un fait_."
"This cruelty is something new I did not know in you."
"You call it cruelty for a husband to give his wife liberty, giving herthe honorable protection of his name, simply on the condition ofobserving the proprieties: is that cruelty?"
"It’s worse than cruel—it’s base, if you want to know!" Anna cried, in arush of hatred, and getting up, she was going away.
"No!" he shrieked, in his shrill voice, which pitched a note higher thanusual even, and his big hands clutching her by the arm so violently thatred marks were left from the bracelet he was squeezing, he forcibly sather down in her place.
"Base! If you care to use that word, what is base is to forsake husbandand child for a lover, while you eat your husband’s bread!"
She bowed her head. She did not say what she had said the evening beforeto her lover, that _he_ was her husband, and her husband wassuperfluous; she did not even think that. She felt all the justice ofhis words, and only said softly:
"You cannot describe my position as worse than I feel it to be myself;but what are you saying all this for?"
"What am I saying it for? what for?" he went on, as angrily. "That youmay know that since you have not carried out my wishes in regard toobserving outward decorum, I will take measures to put an end to thisstate of things."
"Soon, very soon, it will end, anyway," she said; and again, at thethought of death near at hand and now desired, tears came into her eyes.
"It will end sooner than you and your lover have planned! If you musthave the satisfaction of animal passion..."
"Alexey Alexandrovitch! I won’t say it’s not generous, but it’s not likea gentleman to strike anyone who’s down."
"Yes, you only think of yourself! But the sufferings of a man who wasyour husband have no interest for you. You don’t care that his wholelife is ruined, that he is thuff ... thuff..."
Alexey Alexandrovitch was speaking so quickly that he stammered, and wasutterly unable to articulate the word "suffering." In the end hepronounced it "thuffering." She wanted to laugh, and was immediatelyashamed that anything could amuse her at such a moment. And for thefirst time, for an instant, she felt for him, put herself in his place,and was sorry for him. But what could she say or do? Her head sank, andshe sat silent. He too was silent for some time, and then began speakingin a frigid, less shrill voice, emphasizing random words that had nospecial significance.
"I came to tell you..." he said.
She glanced at him. "No, it was my fancy," she thought, recalling theexpression of his face when he stumbled over the word "suffering." "No;can a man with those dull eyes, with that self-satisfied complacency,feel anything?"
"I cannot change anything," she whispered.
"I have come to tell you that I am going tomorrow to Moscow, and shallnot return again to this house, and you will receive notice of what Idecide through the lawyer into whose hands I shall intrust the task ofgetting a divorce. My son is going to my sister’s," said AlexeyAlexandrovitch, with an effort recalling what he had meant to say abouthis son.
"You take Seryozha to hurt me," she said, looking at him from under herbrows. "You do not love him.... Leave me Seryozha!"
"Yes, I have lost even my affection for my son, because he is associatedwith the repulsion I feel for you. But still I shall take him. Goodbye!"
And he was going away, but now she detained him.
"Alexey Alexandrovitch, leave me Seryozha!" she whispered once more. "Ihave nothing else to say. Leave Seryozha till my ... I shall soon beconfined; leave him!"
Alexey Alexandrovitch flew into a rage, and, snatching his hand fromher, he went out of the room without a word.


Chapter 5

The waiting-room of the celebrated Petersburg lawyer was full whenAlexey Alexandrovitch entered it. Three ladies—an old lady, a younglady, and a merchant’s wife—and three gentlemen—one a German banker witha ring on his finger, the second a merchant with a beard, and the thirda wrathful-looking government clerk in official uniform, with a cross onhis neck—had obviously been waiting a long while already. Two clerkswere writing at tables with scratching pens. The appurtenances of thewriting-tables, about which Alexey Alexandrovitch was himself veryfastidious, were exceptionally good. He could not help observing this.One of the clerks, without getting up, turned wrathfully to AlexeyAlexandrovitch, half closing his eyes. "What are you wanting?"
He replied that he had to see the lawyer on some business.
"He is engaged," the clerk responded severely, and he pointed with hispen at the persons waiting, and went on writing.
"Can’t he spare time to see me?" said Alexey Alexandrovitch.
"He has no time free; he is always busy. Kindly wait your turn."
"Then I must trouble you to give him my card," Alexey Alexandrovitchsaid with dignity, seeing the impossibility of preserving his incognito.
The clerk took the card and, obviously not approving of what he read onit, went to the door.
Alexey Alexandrovitch was in principle in favor of the publicity oflegal proceedings, though for some higher official considerations hedisliked the application of the principle in Russia, and disapproved ofit, as far as he could disapprove of anything instituted by authority ofthe Emperor. His whole life had been spent in administrative work, andconsequently, when he did not approve of anything, his disapproval wassoftened by the recognition of the inevitability of mistakes and thepossibility of reform in every department. In the new public law courtshe disliked the restrictions laid on the lawyers conducting cases. Buttill then he had had nothing to do with the law courts, and so haddisapproved of their publicity simply in theory; now his disapprobationwas strengthened by the unpleasant impression made on him in thelawyer’s waiting room.
"Coming immediately," said the clerk; and two minutes later there didactually appear in the doorway the large figure of an old solicitor whohad been consulting with the lawyer himself.
The lawyer was a little, squat, bald man, with a dark, reddish beard,light-colored long eyebrows, and an overhanging brow. He was attired asthough for a wedding, from his cravat to his double watch-chain andvarnished boots. His face was clever and manly, but his dress wasdandified and in bad taste.
"Pray walk in," said the lawyer, addressing Alexey Alexandrovitch; and,gloomily ushering Karenin in before him, he closed the door.
"Won’t you sit down?" He indicated an armchair at a writing tablecovered with papers. He sat down himself, and, rubbing his little handswith short fingers covered with white hairs, he bent his head on oneside. But as soon as he was settled in this position a moth flew overthe table. The lawyer, with a swiftness that could never have beenexpected of him, opened his hands, caught the moth, and resumed hisformer attitude.
"Before beginning to speak of my business," said Alexey Alexandrovitch,following the lawyer’s movements with wondering eyes, "I ought toobserve that the business about which I have to speak to you is to bestrictly private."
The lawyer’s overhanging reddish mustaches were parted in a scarcelyperceptible smile.
"I should not be a lawyer if I could not keep the secrets confided tome. But if you would like proof..."
Alexey Alexandrovitch glanced at his face, and saw that the shrewd, grayeyes were laughing, and seemed to know all about it already.
"You know my name?" Alexey Alexandrovitch resumed.
"I know you and the good"—again he caught a moth—"work you are doing,like every Russian," said the lawyer, bowing.
Alexey Alexandrovitch sighed, plucking up his courage. But having oncemade up his mind he went on in his shrill voice, without timidity—orhesitation, accentuating here and there a word.
"I have the misfortune," Alexey Alexandrovitch began, "to have beendeceived in my married life, and I desire to break off all relationswith my wife by legal means—that is, to be divorced, but to do this sothat my son may not remain with his mother."
The lawyer’s gray eyes tried not to laugh, but they were dancing withirrepressible glee, and Alexey Alexandrovitch saw that it was not simplythe delight of a man who has just got a profitable job: there wastriumph and joy, there was a gleam like the malignant gleam he saw inhis wife’s eyes.
"You desire my assistance in securing a divorce?"
"Yes, precisely so; but I ought to warn you that I may be wasting yourtime and attention. I have come simply to consult you as a preliminarystep. I want a divorce, but the form in which it is possible is of greatconsequence to me. It is very possible that if that form does notcorrespond with my requirements I may give up a legal divorce."
"Oh, that’s always the case," said the lawyer, "and that’s always foryou to decide."
He let his eyes rest on Alexey Alexandrovitch’s feet, feeling that hemight offend his client by the sight of his irrepressible amusement. Helooked at a moth that flew before his nose, and moved his hands, but didnot catch it from regard for Alexey Alexandrovitch’s position.
"Though in their general features our laws on this subject are known tome," pursued Alexey Alexandrovitch, "I should be glad to have an idea ofthe forms in which such things are done in practice."
"You would be glad," the lawyer, without lifting his eyes, responded,adopting, with a certain satisfaction, the tone of his client’s remarks,"for me to lay before you all the methods by which you could secure whatyou desire?"
And on receiving an assuring nod from Alexey Alexandrovitch, he went on,stealing a glance now and then at Alexey Alexandrovitch’s face, whichwas growing red in patches.
"Divorce by our laws," he said, with a slight shade of disapprobation ofour laws, "is possible, as you are aware, in the following cases....Wait a little!" he called to a clerk who put his head in at the door,but he got up all the same, said a few words to him, and sat down again."... In the following cases: physical defect in the married parties,desertion without communication for five years," he said, crooking ashort finger covered with hair, "adultery" (this word he pronounced withobvious satisfaction), "subdivided as follows" (he continued to crookhis fat fingers, though the three cases and their subdivisions couldobviously not be classified together): "physical defect of the husbandor of the wife, adultery of the husband or of the wife." As by now allhis fingers were used up, he uncrooked all his fingers and went on:"This is the theoretical view; but I imagine you have done me the honorto apply to me in order to learn its application in practice. Andtherefore, guided by precedents, I must inform you that in practicecases of divorce may all be reduced to the following—there’s no physicaldefect, I may assume, nor desertion?..."
Alexey Alexandrovitch bowed his head in assent.
"—May be reduced to the following: adultery of one of the marriedparties, and the detection in the fact of the guilty party by mutualagreement, and failing such agreement, accidental detection. It must beadmitted that the latter case is rarely met with in practice," said thelawyer, and stealing a glance at Alexey Alexandrovitch he paused, as aman selling pistols, after enlarging on the advantages of each weapon,might await his customer’s choice. But Alexey Alexandrovitch saidnothing, and therefore the lawyer went on: "The most usual and simple,the sensible course, I consider, is adultery by mutual consent. I shouldnot permit myself to express it so, speaking with a man of noeducation," he said, "but I imagine that to you this is comprehensible."
Alexey Alexandrovitch was, however, so perturbed that he did notimmediately comprehend all the good sense of adultery by mutual consent,and his eyes expressed this uncertainty; but the lawyer promptly came tohis assistance.
"People cannot go on living together—here you have a fact. And if bothare agreed about it, the details and formalities become a matter of noimportance. And at the same time this is the simplest and most certainmethod."
Alexey Alexandrovitch fully understood now. But he had religiousscruples, which hindered the execution of such a plan.
"That is out of the question in the present case," he said. "Only onealternative is possible: undesigned detection, supported by letterswhich I have."
At the mention of letters the lawyer pursed up his lips, and gaveutterance to a thin little compassionate and contemptuous sound.
"Kindly consider," he began, "cases of that kind are, as you are aware,under ecclesiastical jurisdiction; the reverend fathers are fond ofgoing into the minutest details in cases of that kind," he said with asmile, which betrayed his sympathy with the reverend fathers’ taste."Letters may, of course, be a partial confirmation; but detection in thefact there must be of the most direct kind, that is, by eyewitnesses. Infact, if you do me the honor to intrust your confidence to me, you willdo well to leave me the choice of the measures to be employed. If onewants the result, one must admit the means."
"If it is so..." Alexey Alexandrovitch began, suddenly turning white;but at that moment the lawyer rose and again went to the door to speakto the intruding clerk.
"Tell her we don’t haggle over fees!" he said, and returned to AlexeyAlexandrovitch.
On his way back he caught unobserved another moth. "Nice state my repcurtains will be in by the summer!" he thought, frowning.
"And so you were saying?..." he said.
"I will communicate my decision to you by letter," said AlexeyAlexandrovitch, getting up, and he clutched at the table. After standinga moment in silence, he said: "From your words I may consequentlyconclude that a divorce may be obtained? I would ask you to let me knowwhat are your terms."
"It may be obtained if you give me complete liberty of action," said thelawyer, not answering his question. "When can I reckon on receivinginformation from you?" he asked, moving towards the door, his eyes andhis varnished boots shining.
"In a week’s time. Your answer as to whether you will undertake toconduct the case, and on what terms, you will be so good as tocommunicate to me."
"Very good."
The lawyer bowed respectfully, let his client out of the door, and, leftalone, gave himself up to his sense of amusement. He felt so mirthfulthat, contrary to his rules, he made a reduction in his terms to thehaggling lady, and gave up catching moths, finally deciding that nextwinter he must have the furniture covered with velvet, like Sigonin’s.


Chapter 6

Alexey Alexandrovitch had gained a brilliant victory at the sitting ofthe Commission of the 17th of August, but in the sequel this victory cutthe ground from under his feet. The new commission for the inquiry intothe condition of the native tribes in all its branches had been formedand despatched to its destination with an unusual speed and energyinspired by Alexey Alexandrovitch. Within three months a report waspresented. The condition of the native tribes was investigated in itspolitical, administrative, economic, ethnographic, material, andreligious aspects. To all these questions there were answers admirablystated, and answers admitting no shade of doubt, since they were not aproduct of human thought, always liable to error, but were all theproduct of official activity. The answers were all based on officialdata furnished by governors and heads of churches, and founded on thereports of district magistrates and ecclesiastical superintendents,founded in their turn on the reports of parochial overseers and parishpriests; and so all of these answers were unhesitating and certain. Allsuch questions as, for instance, of the cause of failure of crops, ofthe adherence of certain tribes to their ancient beliefs, etc.—questionswhich, but for the convenient intervention of the official machine, arenot, and cannot be solved for ages—received full, unhesitating solution.And this solution was in favor of Alexey Alexandrovitch’s contention.But Stremov, who had felt stung to the quick at the last sitting, had,on the reception of the commission’s report, resorted to tactics whichAlexey Alexandrovitch had not anticipated. Stremov, carrying with himseveral members, went over to Alexey Alexandrovitch’s side, and notcontenting himself with warmly defending the measure proposed byKarenin, proposed other more extreme measures in the same direction.These measures, still further exaggerated in opposition to what wasAlexey Alexandrovitch’s fundamental idea, were passed by the commission,and then the aim of Stremov’s tactics became apparent. Carried to anextreme, the measures seemed at once to be so absurd that the highestauthorities, and public opinion, and intellectual ladies, and thenewspapers, all at the same time fell foul of them, expressing theirindignation both with the measures and their nominal father, AlexeyAlexandrovitch. Stremov drew back, affecting to have blindly followedKarenin, and to be astounded and distressed at what had been done. Thismeant the defeat of Alexey Alexandrovitch. But in spite of failinghealth, in spite of his domestic griefs, he did not give in. There was asplit in the commission. Some members, with Stremov at their head,justified their mistake on the ground that they had put faith in thecommission of revision, instituted by Alexey Alexandrovitch, andmaintained that the report of the commission was rubbish, and simply somuch waste paper. Alexey Alexandrovitch, with a following of those whosaw the danger of so revolutionary an attitude to official documents,persisted in upholding the statements obtained by the revisingcommission. In consequence of this, in the higher spheres, and even insociety, all was chaos, and although everyone was interested, no onecould tell whether the native tribes really were becoming impoverishedand ruined, or whether they were in a flourishing condition. Theposition of Alexey Alexandrovitch, owing to this, and partly owing tothe contempt lavished on him for his wife’s infidelity, became veryprecarious. And in this position he took an important resolution. To theastonishment of the commission, he announced that he should askpermission to go himself to investigate the question on the spot. Andhaving obtained permission, Alexey Alexandrovitch prepared to set off tothese remote provinces.
Alexey Alexandrovitch’s departure made a great sensation, the more so asjust before he started he officially returned the posting-fares allowedhim for twelve horses, to drive to his destination.
"I think it very noble," Betsy said about this to the Princess Myakaya."Why take money for posting-horses when everyone knows that there arerailways everywhere now?"
But Princess Myakaya did not agree, and the Princess Tverskaya’s opinionannoyed her indeed.
"It’s all very well for you to talk," said she, "when you have I don’tknow how many millions; but I am very glad when my husband goes on arevising tour in the summer. It’s very good for him and pleasanttraveling about, and it’s a settled arrangement for me to keep acarriage and coachman on the money."
On his way to the remote provinces Alexey Alexandrovitch stopped forthree days at Moscow.
The day after his arrival he was driving back from calling on thegovernor-general. At the crossroads by Gazetoy Place, where there arealways crowds of carriages and sledges, Alexey Alexandrovitch suddenlyheard his name called out in such a loud and cheerful voice that hecould not help looking round. At the corner of the pavement, in a short,stylish overcoat and a low-crowned fashionable hat, jauntily askew, witha smile that showed a gleam of white teeth and red lips, stood StepanArkadyevitch, radiant, young, and beaming. He called him vigorously andurgently, and insisted on his stopping. He had one arm on the window ofa carriage that was stopping at the corner, and out of the window werethrust the heads of a lady in a velvet hat, and two children. StepanArkadyevitch was smiling and beckoning to his brother-in-law. The ladysmiled a kindly smile too, and she too waved her hand to AlexeyAlexandrovitch. It was Dolly with her children.
Alexey Alexandrovitch did not want to see anyone in Moscow, and least ofall his wife’s brother. He raised his hat and would have driven on, butStepan Arkadyevitch told his coachman to stop, and ran across the snowto him.
"Well, what a shame not to have let us know! Been here long? I was atDussot’s yesterday and saw ‘Karenin’ on the visitors’ list, but it neverentered my head that it was you," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, sticking hishead in at the window of the carriage, "or I should have looked you up.I am glad to see you!" he said, knocking one foot against the other toshake the snow off. "What a shame of you not to let us know!" herepeated.
"I had no time; I am very busy," Alexey Alexandrovitch responded dryly.
"Come to my wife, she does so want to see you."
Alexey Alexandrovitch unfolded the rug in which his frozen feet werewrapped, and getting out of his carriage made his way over the snow toDarya Alexandrovna.
"Why, Alexey Alexandrovitch, what are you cutting us like this for?"said Dolly, smiling.
"I was very busy. Delighted to see you!" he said in a tone clearlyindicating that he was annoyed by it. "How are you?"
"Tell me, how is my darling Anna?"
Alexey Alexandrovitch mumbled something and would have gone on. ButStepan Arkadyevitch stopped him.
"I tell you what we’ll do tomorrow. Dolly, ask him to dinner. We’ll askKoznishev and Pestsov, so as to entertain him with our Moscowcelebrities."
"Yes, please, do come," said Dolly; "we will expect you at five, or sixo’clock, if you like. How is my darling Anna? How long..."
"She is quite well," Alexey Alexandrovitch mumbled, frowning."Delighted!" and he moved away towards his carriage.
"You will come?" Dolly called after him.
Alexey Alexandrovitch said something which Dolly could not catch in thenoise of the moving carriages.
"I shall come round tomorrow!" Stepan Arkadyevitch shouted to him.
Alexey Alexandrovitch got into his carriage, and buried himself in it soas neither to see nor be seen.
"Queer fish!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch to his wife, and glancing at hiswatch, he made a motion of his hand before his face, indicating a caressto his wife and children, and walked jauntily along the pavement.
"Stiva! Stiva!" Dolly called, reddening.
He turned round.
"I must get coats, you know, for Grisha and Tanya. Give me the money."
"Never mind; you tell them I’ll pay the bill!" and he vanished, noddinggenially to an acquaintance who drove by.


Chapter 7

The next day was Sunday. Stepan Arkadyevitch went to the Grand Theaterto a rehearsal of the ballet, and gave Masha Tchibisova, a prettydancing-girl whom he had just taken under his protection, the coralnecklace he had promised her the evening before, and behind the scenesin the dim daylight of the theater, managed to kiss her pretty littleface, radiant over her present. Besides the gift of the necklace hewanted to arrange with her about meeting after the ballet. Afterexplaining that he could not come at the beginning of the ballet, hepromised he would come for the last act and take her to supper. From thetheater Stepan Arkadyevitch drove to Ohotny Row, selected himself thefish and asparagus for dinner, and by twelve o’clock was at Dussot’s,where he had to see three people, luckily all staying at the same hotel:Levin, who had recently come back from abroad and was staying there; thenew head of his department, who had just been promoted to that position,and had come on a tour of revision to Moscow; and his brother-in-law,Karenin, whom he must see, so as to be sure of bringing him to dinner.
Stepan Arkadyevitch liked dining, but still better he liked to give adinner, small, but very choice, both as regards the food and drink andas regards the selection of guests. He particularly liked the program ofthat day’s dinner. There would be fresh perch, asparagus, and _la piècede resistance_—first-rate, but quite plain, roast beef, and wines tosuit: so much for the eating and drinking. Kitty and Levin would be ofthe party, and that this might not be obtrusively evident, there wouldbe a girl cousin too, and young Shtcherbatsky, and _la pièce deresistance_ among the guests—Sergey Koznishev and Alexey Alexandrovitch.Sergey Ivanovitch was a Moscow man, and a philosopher; AlexeyAlexandrovitch a Petersburger, and a practical politician. He wasasking, too, the well-known eccentric enthusiast, Pestsov, a liberal, agreat talker, a musician, an historian, and the most delightfullyyouthful person of fifty, who would be a sauce or garnish for Koznishevand Karenin. He would provoke them and set them off.
The second installment for the forest had been received from themerchant and was not yet exhausted; Dolly had been very amiable andgoodhumored of late, and the idea of the dinner pleased StepanArkadyevitch from every point of view. He was in the most light-heartedmood. There were two circumstances a little unpleasant, but these twocircumstances were drowned in the sea of good-humored gaiety whichflooded the soul of Stepan Arkadyevitch. These two circumstances were:first, that on meeting Alexey Alexandrovitch the day before in thestreet he had noticed that he was cold and reserved with him, andputting the expression of Alexey Alexandrovitch’s face and the fact thathe had not come to see them or let them know of his arrival with therumors he had heard about Anna and Vronsky, Stepan Arkadyevitch guessedthat something was wrong between the husband and wife.
That was one disagreeable thing. The other slightly disagreeable factwas that the new head of his department, like all new heads, had thereputation already of a terrible person, who got up at six o’clock inthe morning, worked like a horse, and insisted on his subordinatesworking in the same way. Moreover, this new head had the furtherreputation of being a bear in his manners, and was, according to allreports, a man of a class in all respects the opposite of that to whichhis predecessor had belonged, and to which Stepan Arkadyevitch hadhitherto belonged himself. On the previous day Stepan Arkadyevitch hadappeared at the office in a uniform, and the new chief had been veryaffable and had talked to him as to an acquaintance. Consequently StepanArkadyevitch deemed it his duty to call upon him in his non-officialdress. The thought that the new chief might not tender him a warmreception was the other unpleasant thing. But Stepan Arkadyevitchinstinctively felt that everything would _come round_ all right."They’re all people, all men, like us poor sinners; why be nasty andquarrelsome?" he thought as he went into the hotel.
"Good-day, Vassily," he said, walking into the corridor with his hatcocked on one side, and addressing a footman he knew; "why, you’ve letyour whiskers grow! Levin, number seven, eh? Take me up, please. Andfind out whether Count Anitchkin" (this was the new head) "isreceiving."
"Yes, sir," Vassily responded, smiling. "You’ve not been to see us for along while."
"I was here yesterday, but at the other entrance. Is this number seven?"
Levin was standing with a peasant from Tver in the middle of the room,measuring a fresh bearskin, when Stepan Arkadyevitch went in.
"What! you killed him?" cried Stepan Arkadyevitch. "Well done! Ashe-bear? How are you, Arhip!"
He shook hands with the peasant and sat down on the edge of a chair,without taking off his coat and hat.
"Come, take off your coat and stay a little," said Levin, taking hishat.
"No, I haven’t time; I’ve only looked in for a tiny second," answeredStepan Arkadyevitch. He threw open his coat, but afterwards did take itoff, and sat on for a whole hour, talking to Levin about hunting and themost intimate subjects.
"Come, tell me, please, what you did abroad? Where have you been?" saidStepan Arkadyevitch, when the peasant had gone.
"Oh, I stayed in Germany, in Prussia, in France, and in England—not inthe capitals, but in the manufacturing towns, and saw a great deal thatwas new to me. And I’m glad I went."
"Yes, I knew your idea of the solution of the labor question."
"Not a bit: in Russia there can be no labor question. In Russia thequestion is that of the relation of the working people to the land;though the question exists there too—but there it’s a matter ofrepairing what’s been ruined, while with us..."
Stepan Arkadyevitch listened attentively to Levin.
"Yes, yes!" he said, "it’s very possible you’re right. But I’m gladyou’re in good spirits, and are hunting bears, and working, andinterested. Shtcherbatsky told me another story—he met you—that you werein such a depressed state, talking of nothing but death...."
"Well, what of it? I’ve not given up thinking of death," said Levin."It’s true that it’s high time I was dead; and that all this isnonsense. It’s the truth I’m telling you. I do value my idea and my workawfully; but in reality only consider this: all this world of ours isnothing but a speck of mildew, which has grown up on a tiny planet. Andfor us to suppose we can have something great—ideas, work—it’s all dustand ashes."
"But all that’s as old as the hills, my boy!"
"It is old; but do you know, when you grasp this fully, then somehoweverything becomes of no consequence. When you understand that you willdie tomorrow, if not today, and nothing will be left, then everything isso unimportant! And I consider my idea very important, but it turns outreally to be as unimportant too, even if it were carried out, as doingfor that bear. So one goes on living, amusing oneself with hunting, withwork—anything so as not to think of death!"
Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled a subtle affectionate smile as he listened toLevin.
"Well, of course! Here you’ve come round to my point. Do you rememberyou attacked me for seeking enjoyment in life? Don’t be so severe, Omoralist!"
"No; all the same, what’s fine in life is..." Levin hesitated—"oh, Idon’t know. All I know is that we shall soon be dead."
"Why so soon?"
"And do you know, there’s less charm in life, when one thinks of death,but there’s more peace."
"On the contrary, the finish is always the best. But I must be going,"said Stepan Arkadyevitch, getting up for the tenth time.
"Oh, no, stay a bit!" said Levin, keeping him. "Now, when shall we seeeach other again? I’m going tomorrow."
"I’m a nice person! Why, that’s just what I came for! You simply mustcome to dinner with us today. Your brother’s coming, and Karenin, mybrother-in-law."
"You don’t mean to say he’s here?" said Levin, and he wanted to inquireabout Kitty. He had heard at the beginning of the winter that she was atPetersburg with her sister, the wife of the diplomat, and he did notknow whether she had come back or not; but he changed his mind and didnot ask. "Whether she’s coming or not, I don’t care," he said tohimself.
"So you’ll come?"
"Of course."
"At five o’clock, then, and not evening dress."
And Stepan Arkadyevitch got up and went down below to the new head ofhis department. Instinct had not misled Stepan Arkadyevitch. Theterrible new head turned out to be an extremely amenable person, andStepan Arkadyevitch lunched with him and stayed on, so that it was fouro’clock before he got to Alexey Alexandrovitch.


Chapter 8

Alexey Alexandrovitch, on coming back from church service, had spent thewhole morning indoors. He had two pieces of business before him thatmorning; first, to receive and send on a deputation from the nativetribes which was on its way to Petersburg, and now at Moscow; secondly,to write the promised letter to the lawyer. The deputation, though ithad been summoned at Alexey Alexandrovitch’s instigation, was notwithout its discomforting and even dangerous aspect, and he was glad hehad found it in Moscow. The members of this deputation had not theslightest conception of their duty and the part they were to play. Theynaïvely believed that it was their business to lay before the commissiontheir needs and the actual condition of things, and to ask assistance ofthe government, and utterly failed to grasp that some of theirstatements and requests supported the contention of the enemy’s side,and so spoiled the whole business. Alexey Alexandrovitch was busilyengaged with them for a long while, drew up a program for them fromwhich they were not to depart, and on dismissing them wrote a letter toPetersburg for the guidance of the deputation. He had his chief supportin this affair in the Countess Lidia Ivanovna. She was a specialist inthe matter of deputations, and no one knew better than she how to managethem, and put them in the way they should go. Having completed thistask, Alexey Alexandrovitch wrote the letter to the lawyer. Without theslightest hesitation he gave him permission to act as he might judgebest. In the letter he enclosed three of Vronsky’s notes to Anna, whichwere in the portfolio he had taken away.
Since Alexey Alexandrovitch had left home with the intention of notreturning to his family again, and since he had been at the lawyer’s andhad spoken, though only to one man, of his intention, since especiallyhe had translated the matter from the world of real life to the world ofink and paper, he had grown more and more used to his own intention, andby now distinctly perceived the feasibility of its execution.
He was sealing the envelope to the lawyer, when he heard the loud tonesof Stepan Arkadyevitch’s voice. Stepan Arkadyevitch was disputing withAlexey Alexandrovitch’s servant, and insisting on being announced.
"No matter," thought Alexey Alexandrovitch, "so much the better. I willinform him at once of my position in regard to his sister, and explainwhy it is I can’t dine with him."
"Come in!" he said aloud, collecting his papers, and putting them in theblotting-paper.
"There, you see, you’re talking nonsense, and he’s at home!" respondedStepan Arkadyevitch’s voice, addressing the servant, who had refused tolet him in, and taking off his coat as he went, Oblonsky walked into theroom. "Well, I’m awfully glad I’ve found you! So I hope..." StepanArkadyevitch began cheerfully.
"I cannot come," Alexey Alexandrovitch said coldly, standing and notasking his visitor to sit down.
Alexey Alexandrovitch had thought to pass at once into those frigidrelations in which he ought to stand with the brother of a wife againstwhom he was beginning a suit for divorce. But he had not taken intoaccount the ocean of kindliness brimming over in the heart of StepanArkadyevitch.
Stepan Arkadyevitch opened wide his clear, shining eyes.
"Why can’t you? What do you mean?" he asked in perplexity, speaking inFrench. "Oh, but it’s a promise. And we’re all counting on you."
"I want to tell you that I can’t dine at your house, because the termsof relationship which have existed between us must cease."
"How? How do you mean? What for?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch with a smile.
"Because I am beginning an action for divorce against your sister, mywife. I ought to have..."
But, before Alexey Alexandrovitch had time to finish his sentence,Stepan Arkadyevitch was behaving not at all as he had expected. Hegroaned and sank into an armchair.
"No, Alexey Alexandrovitch! What are you saying?" cried Oblonsky, andhis suffering was apparent in his face.
"It is so."
"Excuse me, I can’t, I can’t believe it!"
Alexey Alexandrovitch sat down, feeling that his words had not had theeffect he anticipated, and that it would be unavoidable for him toexplain his position, and that, whatever explanations he might make, hisrelations with his brother-in-law would remain unchanged.
"Yes, I am brought to the painful necessity of seeking a divorce," hesaid.
"I will say one thing, Alexey Alexandrovitch. I know you for anexcellent, upright man; I know Anna—excuse me, I can’t change my opinionof her—for a good, an excellent woman; and so, excuse me, I cannotbelieve it. There is some misunderstanding," said he.
"Oh, if it were merely a misunderstanding!..."
"Pardon, I understand," interposed Stepan Arkadyevitch. "But ofcourse.... One thing: you must not act in haste. You must not, you mustnot act in haste!"
"I am not acting in haste," Alexey Alexandrovitch said coldly, "but onecannot ask advice of anyone in such a matter. I have quite made up mymind."
"This is awful!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "I would do one thing, AlexeyAlexandrovitch. I beseech you, do it!" he said. "No action has yet beentaken, if I understand rightly. Before you take advice, see my wife,talk to her. She loves Anna like a sister, she loves you, and she’s awonderful woman. For God’s sake, talk to her! Do me that favor, Ibeseech you!"
Alexey Alexandrovitch pondered, and Stepan Arkadyevitch looked at himsympathetically, without interrupting his silence.
"You will go to see her?"
"I don’t know. That was just why I have not been to see you. I imagineour relations must change."
"Why so? I don’t see that. Allow me to believe that apart from ourconnection you have for me, at least in part, the same friendly feelingI have always had for you ... and sincere esteem," said StepanArkadyevitch, pressing his hand. "Even if your worst suppositions werecorrect, I don’t—and never would—take on myself to judge either side,and I see no reason why our relations should be affected. But now, dothis, come and see my wife."
"Well, we look at the matter differently," said Alexey Alexandrovitchcoldly. "However, we won’t discuss it."
"No; why shouldn’t you come today to dine, anyway? My wife’s expectingyou. Please, do come. And, above all, talk it over with her. She’s awonderful woman. For God’s sake, on my knees, I implore you!"
"If you so much wish it, I will come," said Alexey Alexandrovitch,sighing.
And, anxious to change the conversation, he inquired about whatinterested them both—the new head of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s department, aman not yet old, who had suddenly been promoted to so high a position.
Alexey Alexandrovitch had previously felt no liking for Count Anitchkin,and had always differed from him in his opinions. But now, from afeeling readily comprehensible to officials—that hatred felt by one whohas suffered a defeat in the service for one who has received apromotion, he could not endure him.
"Well, have you seen him?" said Alexey Alexandrovitch with a malignantsmile.
"Of course; he was at our sitting yesterday. He seems to know his workcapitally, and to be very energetic."
"Yes, but what is his energy directed to?" said Alexey Alexandrovitch."Is he aiming at doing anything, or simply undoing what’s been done?It’s the great misfortune of our government—this paper administration,of which he’s a worthy representative."
"Really, I don’t know what fault one could find with him. His policy Idon’t know, but one thing—he’s a very nice fellow," answered StepanArkadyevitch. "I’ve just been seeing him, and he’s really a capitalfellow. We lunched together, and I taught him how to make, you know thatdrink, wine and oranges. It’s so cooling. And it’s a wonder he didn’tknow it. He liked it awfully. No, really he’s a capital fellow."
Stepan Arkadyevitch glanced at his watch.
"Why, good heavens, it’s four already, and I’ve still to go toDolgovushin’s! So please come round to dinner. You can’t imagine how youwill grieve my wife and me."
The way in which Alexey Alexandrovitch saw his brother-in-law out wasvery different from the manner in which he had met him.
"I’ve promised, and I’ll come," he answered wearily.
"Believe me, I appreciate it, and I hope you won’t regret it," answeredStepan Arkadyevitch, smiling.
And, putting on his coat as he went, he patted the footman on the head,chuckled, and went out.
"At five o’clock, and not evening dress, please," he shouted once more,turning at the door.


Chapter 9

It was past five, and several guests had already arrived, before thehost himself got home. He went in together with Sergey IvanovitchKoznishev and Pestsov, who had reached the street door at the samemoment. These were the two leading representatives of the Moscowintellectuals, as Oblonsky had called them. Both were men respected fortheir character and their intelligence. They respected each other, butwere in complete and hopeless disagreement upon almost every subject,not because they belonged to opposite parties, but precisely becausethey were of the same party (their enemies refused to see anydistinction between their views); but, in that party, each had his ownspecial shade of opinion. And since no difference is less easilyovercome than the difference of opinion about semi-abstract questions,they never agreed in any opinion, and had long, indeed, been accustomedto jeer without anger, each at the other’s incorrigible aberrations.
They were just going in at the door, talking of the weather, when StepanArkadyevitch overtook them. In the drawing room there were alreadysitting Prince Alexander Dmitrievitch Shtcherbatsky, youngShtcherbatsky, Turovtsin, Kitty, and Karenin.
Stepan Arkadyevitch saw immediately that things were not going well inthe drawing-room without him. Darya Alexandrovna, in her best gray silkgown, obviously worried about the children, who were to have theirdinner by themselves in the nursery, and by her husband’s absence, wasnot equal to the task of making the party mix without him. All weresitting like so many priests’ wives on a visit (so the old princeexpressed it), obviously wondering why they were there, and pumping upremarks simply to avoid being silent. Turovtsin—good, simple man—feltunmistakably a fish out of water, and the smile with which his thicklips greeted Stepan Arkadyevitch said, as plainly as words: "Well, oldboy, you have popped me down in a learned set! A drinking party now, orthe _Château des Fleurs_, would be more in my line!" The old prince satin silence, his bright little eyes watching Karenin from one side, andStepan Arkadyevitch saw that he had already formed a phrase to sum upthat politician of whom guests were invited to partake as though he werea sturgeon. Kitty was looking at the door, calling up all her energiesto keep her from blushing at the entrance of Konstantin Levin. YoungShtcherbatsky, who had not been introduced to Karenin, was trying tolook as though he were not in the least conscious of it. Karenin himselfhad followed the Petersburg fashion for a dinner with ladies and waswearing evening dress and a white tie. Stepan Arkadyevitch saw by hisface that he had come simply to keep his promise, and was performing adisagreeable duty in being present at this gathering. He was indeed theperson chiefly responsible for the chill benumbing all the guests beforeStepan Arkadyevitch came in.
On entering the drawing room Stepan Arkadyevitch apologized, explainingthat he had been detained by that prince, who was always the scapegoatfor all his absences and unpunctualities, and in one moment he had madeall the guests acquainted with each other, and, bringing together AlexeyAlexandrovitch and Sergey Koznishev, started them on a discussion of theRussification of Poland, into which they immediately plunged withPestsov. Slapping Turovtsin on the shoulder, he whispered somethingcomic in his ear, and set him down by his wife and the old prince. Thenhe told Kitty she was looking very pretty that evening, and presentedShtcherbatsky to Karenin. In a moment he had so kneaded together thesocial dough that the drawing room became very lively, and there was amerry buzz of voices. Konstantin Levin was the only person who had notarrived. But this was so much the better, as going into the dining room,Stepan Arkadyevitch found to his horror that the port and sherry hadbeen procured from Deprè, and not from Levy, and, directing that thecoachman should be sent off as speedily as possible to Levy’s, he wasgoing back to the drawing room.
In the dining room he was met by Konstantin Levin.
"I’m not late?"
"You can never help being late!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, taking hisarm.
"Have you a lot of people? Who’s here?" asked Levin, unable to helpblushing, as he knocked the snow off his cap with his glove.
"All our own set. Kitty’s here. Come along, I’ll introduce you toKarenin."
Stepan Arkadyevitch, for all his liberal views, was well aware that tomeet Karenin was sure to be felt a flattering distinction, and sotreated his best friends to this honor. But at that instant KonstantinLevin was not in a condition to feel all the gratification of makingsuch an acquaintance. He had not seen Kitty since that memorable eveningwhen he met Vronsky, not counting, that is, the moment when he had had aglimpse of her on the highroad. He had known at the bottom of his heartthat he would see her here today. But to keep his thoughts free, he hadtried to persuade himself that he did not know it. Now when he heardthat she was here, he was suddenly conscious of such delight, and at thesame time of such dread, that his breath failed him and he could notutter what he wanted to say.
"What is she like, what is she like? Like what she used to be, or likewhat she was in the carriage? What if Darya Alexandrovna told the truth?Why shouldn’t it be the truth?" he thought.
"Oh, please, introduce me to Karenin," he brought out with an effort,and with a desperately determined step he walked into the drawing roomand beheld her.
She was not the same as she used to be, nor was she as she had been inthe carriage; she was quite different.
She was scared, shy, shame-faced, and still more charming from it. Shesaw him the very instant he walked into the room. She had been expectinghim. She was delighted, and so confused at her own delight that therewas a moment, the moment when he went up to her sister and glanced againat her, when she, and he, and Dolly, who saw it all, thought she wouldbreak down and would begin to cry. She crimsoned, turned white,crimsoned again, and grew faint, waiting with quivering lips for him tocome to her. He went up to her, bowed, and held out his hand withoutspeaking. Except for the slight quiver of her lips and the moisture inher eyes that made them brighter, her smile was almost calm as she said:
"How long it is since we’ve seen each other!" and with desperatedetermination she pressed his hand with her cold hand.
"You’ve not seen me, but I’ve seen you," said Levin, with a radiantsmile of happiness. "I saw you when you were driving from the railwaystation to Ergushovo."
"When?" she asked, wondering.
"You were driving to Ergushovo," said Levin, feeling as if he would sobwith the rapture that was flooding his heart. "And how dared I associatea thought of anything not innocent with this touching creature? And,yes, I do believe it’s true what Darya Alexandrovna told me," hethought.
Stepan Arkadyevitch took him by the arm and led him away to Karenin.
"Let me introduce you." He mentioned their names.
"Very glad to meet you again," said Alexey Alexandrovitch coldly,shaking hands with Levin.
"You are acquainted?" Stepan Arkadyevitch asked in surprise.
"We spent three hours together in the train," said Levin smiling, "butgot out, just as in a masquerade, quite mystified—at least I was."
"Nonsense! Come along, please," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, pointing inthe direction of the dining room.
The men went into the dining-room and went up to a table, laid with sixsorts of spirits and as many kinds of cheese, some with little silverspades and some without, caviar, herrings, preserves of various kinds,and plates with slices of French bread.
The men stood round the strong-smelling spirits and salt delicacies, andthe discussion of the Russification of Poland between Koznishev,Karenin, and Pestsov died down in anticipation of dinner.
Sergey Ivanovitch was unequaled in his skill in winding up the mostheated and serious argument by some unexpected pinch of Attic salt thatchanged the disposition of his opponent. He did this now.
Alexey Alexandrovitch had been maintaining that the Russification ofPoland could only be accomplished as a result of larger measures whichought to be introduced by the Russian government.
Pestsov insisted that one country can only absorb another when it is themore densely populated.
Koznishev admitted both points, but with limitations. As they were goingout of the drawing room to conclude the argument, Koznishev said,smiling:
"So, then, for the Russification of our foreign populations there is butone method—to bring up as many children as one can. My brother and I areterribly in fault, I see. You married men, especially you, StepanArkadyevitch, are the real patriots: what number have you reached?" hesaid, smiling genially at their host and holding out a tiny wine glassto him.
Everyone laughed, and Stepan Arkadyevitch with particular good humor.
"Oh, yes, that’s the best method!" he said, munching cheese and fillingthe wine-glass with a special sort of spirit. The conversation droppedat the jest.
"This cheese is not bad. Shall I give you some?" said the master of thehouse. "Why, have you been going in for gymnastics again?" he askedLevin, pinching his muscle with his left hand. Levin smiled, bent hisarm, and under Stepan Arkadyevitch’s fingers the muscles swelled up likea sound cheese, hard as a knob of iron, through the fine cloth of thecoat.
"What biceps! A perfect Samson!"
"I imagine great strength is needed for hunting bears," observed AlexeyAlexandrovitch, who had the mistiest notions about the chase. He cut offand spread with cheese a wafer of bread fine as a spider-web.
Levin smiled.
"Not at all. Quite the contrary; a child can kill a bear," he said, witha slight bow moving aside for the ladies, who were approaching thetable.
"You have killed a bear, I’ve been told!" said Kitty, trying assiduouslyto catch with her fork a perverse mushroom that would slip away, andsetting the lace quivering over her white arm. "Are there bears on yourplace?" she added, turning her charming little head to him and smiling.
There was apparently nothing extraordinary in what she said, but whatunutterable meaning there was for him in every sound, in every turn ofher lips, her eyes, her hand as she said it! There was entreaty forforgiveness, and trust in him, and tenderness—soft, timid tenderness—andpromise and hope and love for him, which he could not but believe in andwhich choked him with happiness.
"No, we’ve been hunting in the Tver province. It was coming back fromthere that I met your _beaufrère_ in the train, or your _beaufrère’s_brother-in-law," he said with a smile. "It was an amusing meeting."
And he began telling with droll good-humor how, after not sleeping allnight, he had, wearing an old fur-lined, full-skirted coat, got intoAlexey Alexandrovitch’s compartment.
"The conductor, forgetting the proverb, would have chucked me out onaccount of my attire; but thereupon I began expressing my feelings inelevated language, and ... you, too," he said, addressing Karenin andforgetting his name, "at first would have ejected me on the ground ofthe old coat, but afterwards you took my part, for which I am extremelygrateful."
"The rights of passengers generally to choose their seats are tooill-defined," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, rubbing the tips of hisfingers on his handkerchief.
"I saw you were in uncertainty about me," said Levin, smilinggood-naturedly, "but I made haste to plunge into intellectualconversation to smooth over the defects of my attire." SergeyIvanovitch, while he kept up a conversation with their hostess, had oneear for his brother, and he glanced askance at him. "What is the matterwith him today? Why such a conquering hero?" he thought. He did not knowthat Levin was feeling as though he had grown wings. Levin knew she waslistening to his words and that she was glad to listen to him. And thiswas the only thing that interested him. Not in that room only, but inthe whole world, there existed for him only himself, with enormouslyincreased importance and dignity in his own eyes, and she. He felthimself on a pinnacle that made him giddy, and far away down below wereall those nice excellent Karenins, Oblonskys, and all the world.
Quite without attracting notice, without glancing at them, as thoughthere were no other places left, Stepan Arkadyevitch put Levin and Kittyside by side.
"Oh, you may as well sit there," he said to Levin.
The dinner was as choice as the china, in which Stepan Arkadyevitch wasa connoisseur. The _soupe Marie-Louise_ was a splendid success; the tinypies eaten with it melted in the mouth and were irreproachable. The twofootmen and Matvey, in white cravats, did their duty with the dishes andwines unobtrusively, quietly, and swiftly. On the material side thedinner was a success; it was no less so on the immaterial. Theconversation, at times general and at times between individuals, neverpaused, and towards the end the company was so lively that the men rosefrom the table, without stopping speaking, and even AlexeyAlexandrovitch thawed.


Chapter 10

Pestsov liked thrashing an argument out to the end, and was notsatisfied with Sergey Ivanovitch’s words, especially as he felt theinjustice of his view.
"I did not mean," he said over the soup, addressing AlexeyAlexandrovitch, "mere density of population alone, but in conjunctionwith fundamental ideas, and not by means of principles."
"It seems to me," Alexey Alexandrovitch said languidly, and with nohaste, "that that’s the same thing. In my opinion, influence overanother people is only possible to the people which has the higherdevelopment, which..."
"But that’s just the question," Pestsov broke in in his bass.
He was always in a hurry to speak, and seemed always to put his wholesoul into what he was saying. "In what are we to make higher developmentconsist? The English, the French, the Germans, which is at the higheststage of development? Which of them will nationalize the other? We seethe Rhine provinces have been turned French, but the Germans are not ata lower stage!" he shouted. "There is another law at work there."
"I fancy that the greater influence is always on the side of truecivilization," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, slightly lifting hiseyebrows.
"But what are we to lay down as the outward signs of true civilization?"said Pestsov.
"I imagine such signs are generally very well known," said AlexeyAlexandrovitch.
"But are they fully known?" Sergey Ivanovitch put in with a subtlesmile. "It is the accepted view now that real culture must be purelyclassical; but we see most intense disputes on each side of thequestion, and there is no denying that the opposite camp has strongpoints in its favor."
"You are for classics, Sergey Ivanovitch. Will you take red wine?" saidStepan Arkadyevitch.
"I am not expressing my own opinion of either form of culture," SergeyIvanovitch said, holding out his glass with a smile of condescension, asto a child. "I only say that both sides have strong arguments to supportthem," he went on, addressing Alexey Alexandrovitch. "My sympathies areclassical from education, but in this discussion I am personally unableto arrive at a conclusion. I see no distinct grounds for classicalstudies being given a preeminence over scientific studies."
"The natural sciences have just as great an educational value," put inPestsov. "Take astronomy, take botany, or zoology with its system ofgeneral principles."
"I cannot quite agree with that," responded Alexey Alexandrovitch "Itseems to me that one must admit that the very process of studying theforms of language has a peculiarly favorable influence on intellectualdevelopment. Moreover, it cannot be denied that the influence of theclassical authors is in the highest degree moral, while, unfortunately,with the study of the natural sciences are associated the false andnoxious doctrines which are the curse of our day."
Sergey Ivanovitch would have said something, but Pestsov interrupted himin his rich bass. He began warmly contesting the justice of this view.Sergey Ivanovitch waited serenely to speak, obviously with a convincingreply ready.
"But," said Sergey Ivanovitch, smiling subtly, and addressing Karenin,"One must allow that to weigh all the advantages and disadvantages ofclassical and scientific studies is a difficult task, and the questionwhich form of education was to be preferred would not have been soquickly and conclusively decided if there had not been in favor ofclassical education, as you expressed it just now, its moral—disons lemot—anti-nihilist influence."
"Undoubtedly."
"If it had not been for the distinctive property of anti-nihilisticinfluence on the side of classical studies, we should have consideredthe subject more, have weighed the arguments on both sides," said SergeyIvanovitch with a subtle smile, "we should have given elbow-room to bothtendencies. But now we know that these little pills of classicallearning possess the medicinal property of anti-nihilism, and we boldlyprescribe them to our patients.... But what if they had no suchmedicinal property?" he wound up humorously.
At Sergey Ivanovitch’s little pills, everyone laughed; Turovtsin inespecial roared loudly and jovially, glad at last to have foundsomething to laugh at, all he ever looked for in listening toconversation.
Stepan Arkadyevitch had not made a mistake in inviting Pestsov. WithPestsov intellectual conversation never flagged for an instant. DirectlySergey Ivanovitch had concluded the conversation with his jest, Pestsovpromptly started a new one.
"I can’t agree even," said he, "that the government had that aim. Thegovernment obviously is guided by abstract considerations, and remainsindifferent to the influence its measures may exercise. The education ofwomen, for instance, would naturally be regarded as likely to beharmful, but the government opens schools and universities for women."
And the conversation at once passed to the new subject of the educationof women.
Alexey Alexandrovitch expressed the idea that the education of women isapt to be confounded with the emancipation of women, and that it is onlyso that it can be considered dangerous.
"I consider, on the contrary, that the two questions are inseparablyconnected together," said Pestsov; "it is a vicious circle. Woman isdeprived of rights from lack of education, and the lack of educationresults from the absence of rights. We must not forget that thesubjection of women is so complete, and dates from such ages back thatwe are often unwilling to recognize the gulf that separates them fromus," said he.
"You said rights," said Sergey Ivanovitch, waiting till Pestsov hadfinished, "meaning the right of sitting on juries, of voting, ofpresiding at official meetings, the right of entering the civil service,of sitting in parliament..."
"Undoubtedly."
"But if women, as a rare exception, can occupy such positions, it seemsto me you are wrong in using the expression ‘rights.’ It would be morecorrect to say duties. Every man will agree that in doing the duty of ajuryman, a witness, a telegraph clerk, we feel we are performing duties.And therefore it would be correct to say that women are seeking duties,and quite legitimately. And one can but sympathize with this desire toassist in the general labor of man."
"Quite so," Alexey Alexandrovitch assented. "The question, I imagine, issimply whether they are fitted for such duties."
"They will most likely be perfectly fitted," said Stepan Arkadyevitch,"when education has become general among them. We see this..."
"How about the proverb?" said the prince, who had a long while beenintent on the conversation, his little comical eyes twinkling. "I cansay it before my daughter: her hair is long, because her wit is..."
"Just what they thought of the negroes before their emancipation!" saidPestsov angrily.
"What seems strange to me is that women should seek fresh duties," saidSergey Ivanovitch, "while we see, unhappily, that men usually try toavoid them."
"Duties are bound up with rights—power, money, honor; those are whatwomen are seeking," said Pestsov.
"Just as though I should seek the right to be a wet-nurse and feelinjured because women are paid for the work, while no one will take me,"said the old prince.
Turovtsin exploded in a loud roar of laughter and Sergey Ivanovitchregretted that he had not made this comparison. Even AlexeyAlexandrovitch smiled.
"Yes, but a man can’t nurse a baby," said Pestsov, "while a woman..."
"No, there was an Englishman who did suckle his baby on board ship,"said the old prince, feeling this freedom in conversation permissiblebefore his own daughters.
"There are as many such Englishmen as there would be women officials,"said Sergey Ivanovitch.
"Yes, but what is a girl to do who has no family?" put in StepanArkadyevitch, thinking of Masha Tchibisova, whom he had had in his mindall along, in sympathizing with Pestsov and supporting him.
"If the story of such a girl were thoroughly sifted, you would find shehad abandoned a family—her own or a sister’s, where she might have founda woman’s duties," Darya Alexandrovna broke in unexpectedly in a tone ofexasperation, probably suspecting what sort of girl Stepan Arkadyevitchwas thinking of.
"But we take our stand on principle as the ideal," replied Pestsov inhis mellow bass. "Woman desires to have rights, to be independent,educated. She is oppressed, humiliated by the consciousness of herdisabilities."
"And I’m oppressed and humiliated that they won’t engage me at theFoundling," the old prince said again, to the huge delight of Turovtsin,who in his mirth dropped his asparagus with the thick end in the sauce.


Chapter 11

Everyone took part in the conversation except Kitty and Levin. At first,when they were talking of the influence that one people has on another,there rose to Levin’s mind what he had to say on the subject. But theseideas, once of such importance in his eyes, seemed to come into hisbrain as in a dream, and had now not the slightest interest for him. Iteven struck him as strange that they should be so eager to talk of whatwas of no use to anyone. Kitty, too, should, one would have supposed,have been interested in what they were saying of the rights andeducation of women. How often she had mused on the subject, thinking ofher friend abroad, Varenka, of her painful state of dependence, howoften she had wondered about herself what would become of her if she didnot marry, and how often she had argued with her sister about it! But itdid not interest her at all. She and Levin had a conversation of theirown, yet not a conversation, but some sort of mysterious communication,which brought them every moment nearer, and stirred in both a sense ofglad terror before the unknown into which they were entering.
At first Levin, in answer to Kitty’s question how he could have seen herlast year in the carriage, told her how he had been coming home from themowing along the highroad and had met her.
"It was very, very early in the morning. You were probably only justawake. Your mother was asleep in the corner. It was an exquisitemorning. I was walking along wondering who it could be in afour-in-hand? It was a splendid set of four horses with bells, and in asecond you flashed by, and I saw you at the window—you were sitting likethis, holding the strings of your cap in both hands, and thinkingawfully deeply about something," he said, smiling. "How I should like toknow what you were thinking about then! Something important?"
"Wasn’t I dreadfully untidy?" she wondered, but seeing the smile ofecstasy these reminiscences called up, she felt that the impression shehad made had been very good. She blushed and laughed with delight;"Really I don’t remember."
"How nicely Turovtsin laughs!" said Levin, admiring his moist eyes andshaking chest.
"Have you known him long?" asked Kitty.
"Oh, everyone knows him!"
"And I see you think he’s a horrid man?"
"Not horrid, but nothing in him."
"Oh, you’re wrong! And you must give up thinking so directly!" saidKitty. "I used to have a very poor opinion of him too, but he, he’s anawfully nice and wonderfully good-hearted man. He has a heart of gold."
"How could you find out what sort of heart he has?"
"We are great friends. I know him very well. Last winter, soon after ...you came to see us," she said, with a guilty and at the same timeconfiding smile, "all Dolly’s children had scarlet fever, and hehappened to come and see her. And only fancy," she said in a whisper,"he felt so sorry for her that he stayed and began to help her lookafter the children. Yes, and for three weeks he stopped with them, andlooked after the children like a nurse."
"I am telling Konstantin Dmitrievitch about Turovtsin in the scarletfever," she said, bending over to her sister.
"Yes, it was wonderful, noble!" said Dolly, glancing towards Turovtsin,who had become aware they were talking of him, and smiling gently tohim. Levin glanced once more at Turovtsin, and wondered how it was hehad not realized all this man’s goodness before.
"I’m sorry, I’m sorry, and I’ll never think ill of people again!" hesaid gaily, genuinely expressing what he felt at the moment.


Chapter 12

Connected with the conversation that had sprung up on the rights ofwomen there were certain questions as to the inequality of rights inmarriage improper to discuss before the ladies. Pestsov had severaltimes during dinner touched upon these questions, but Sergey Ivanovitchand Stepan Arkadyevitch carefully drew him off them.
When they rose from the table and the ladies had gone out, Pestsov didnot follow them, but addressing Alexey Alexandrovitch, began to expoundthe chief ground of inequality. The inequality in marriage, in hisopinion, lay in the fact that the infidelity of the wife and theinfidelity of the husband are punished unequally, both by the law and bypublic opinion. Stepan Arkadyevitch went hurriedly up to AlexeyAlexandrovitch and offered him a cigar.
"No, I don’t smoke," Alexey Alexandrovitch answered calmly, and asthough purposely wishing to show that he was not afraid of the subject,he turned to Pestsov with a chilly smile.
"I imagine that such a view has a foundation in the very nature ofthings," he said, and would have gone on to the drawing room. But atthis point Turovtsin broke suddenly and unexpectedly into theconversation, addressing Alexey Alexandrovitch.
"You heard, perhaps, about Pryatchnikov?" said Turovtsin, warmed up bythe champagne he had drunk, and long waiting for an opportunity to breakthe silence that had weighed on him. "Vasya Pryatchnikov," he said, witha good-natured smile on his damp, red lips, addressing himselfprincipally to the most important guest, Alexey Alexandrovitch, "theytold me today he fought a duel with Kvitsky at Tver, and has killedhim."
Just as it always seems that one bruises oneself on a sore place, soStepan Arkadyevitch felt now that the conversation would by ill luckfall every moment on Alexey Alexandrovitch’s sore spot. He would againhave got his brother-in-law away, but Alexey Alexandrovitch himselfinquired, with curiosity:
"What did Pryatchnikov fight about?"
"His wife. Acted like a man, he did! Called him out and shot him!"
"Ah!" said Alexey Alexandrovitch indifferently, and lifting hiseyebrows, he went into the drawing room.
"How glad I am you have come," Dolly said with a frightened smile,meeting him in the outer drawing room. "I must talk to you. Let’s sithere."
Alexey Alexandrovitch, with the same expression of indifference, givenhim by his lifted eyebrows, sat down beside Darya Alexandrovna, andsmiled affectedly.
"It’s fortunate," said he, "especially as I was meaning to ask you toexcuse me, and to be taking leave. I have to start tomorrow."
Darya Alexandrovna was firmly convinced of Anna’s innocence, and shefelt herself growing pale and her lips quivering with anger at thisfrigid, unfeeling man, who was so calmly intending to ruin her innocentfriend.
"Alexey Alexandrovitch," she said, with desperate resolution looking himin the face, "I asked you about Anna, you made me no answer. How isshe?"
"She is, I believe, quite well, Darya Alexandrovna," replied AlexeyAlexandrovitch, not looking at her.
"Alexey Alexandrovitch, forgive me, I have no right ... but I love Annaas a sister, and esteem her; I beg, I beseech you to tell me what iswrong between you? what fault do you find with her?"
Alexey Alexandrovitch frowned, and almost closing his eyes, dropped hishead.
"I presume that your husband has told you the grounds on which Iconsider it necessary to change my attitude to Anna Arkadyevna?" hesaid, not looking her in the face, but eyeing with displeasureShtcherbatsky, who was walking across the drawing room.
"I don’t believe it, I don’t believe it, I can’t believe it!" Dollysaid, clasping her bony hands before her with a vigorous gesture. Sherose quickly, and laid her hand on Alexey Alexandrovitch’s sleeve. "Weshall be disturbed here. Come this way, please."
Dolly’s agitation had an effect on Alexey Alexandrovitch. He got up andsubmissively followed her to the schoolroom. They sat down to a tablecovered with an oilcloth cut in slits by penknives.
"I don’t, I don’t believe it!" Dolly said, trying to catch his glancethat avoided her.
"One cannot disbelieve facts, Darya Alexandrovna," said he, with anemphasis on the word "facts."
"But what has she done?" said Darya Alexandrovna. "What precisely hasshe done?"
"She has forsaken her duty, and deceived her husband. That’s what shehas done," said he.
"No, no, it can’t be! No, for God’s sake, you are mistaken," said Dolly,putting her hands to her temples and closing her eyes.
Alexey Alexandrovitch smiled coldly, with his lips alone, meaning tosignify to her and to himself the firmness of his conviction; but thiswarm defense, though it could not shake him, reopened his wound. Hebegan to speak with greater heat.
"It is extremely difficult to be mistaken when a wife herself informsher husband of the fact—informs him that eight years of her life, and ason, all that’s a mistake, and that she wants to begin life again," hesaid angrily, with a snort.
"Anna and sin—I cannot connect them, I cannot believe it!"
"Darya Alexandrovna," he said, now looking straight into Dolly’s kindly,troubled face, and feeling that his tongue was being loosened in spiteof himself, "I would give a great deal for doubt to be still possible.When I doubted, I was miserable, but it was better than now. When Idoubted, I had hope; but now there is no hope, and still I doubt ofeverything. I am in such doubt of everything that I even hate my son,and sometimes do not believe he is my son. I am very unhappy."
He had no need to say that. Darya Alexandrovna had seen that as soon ashe glanced into her face; and she felt sorry for him, and her faith inthe innocence of her friend began to totter.
"Oh, this is awful, awful! But can it be true that you are resolved on adivorce?"
"I am resolved on extreme measures. There is nothing else for me to do."
"Nothing else to do, nothing else to do..." she replied, with tears inher eyes. "Oh no, don’t say nothing else to do!" she said.
"What is horrible in a trouble of this kind is that one cannot, as inany other—in loss, in death—bear one’s trouble in peace, but that onemust act," said he, as though guessing her thought. "One must get out ofthe humiliating position in which one is placed; one can’t live _àtrois_."
"I understand, I quite understand that," said Dolly, and her head sank.She was silent for a little, thinking of herself, of her own grief inher family, and all at once, with an impulsive movement, she raised herhead and clasped her hands with an imploring gesture. "But wait alittle! You are a Christian. Think of her! What will become of her, ifyou cast her off?"
"I have thought, Darya Alexandrovna, I have thought a great deal," saidAlexey Alexandrovitch. His face turned red in patches, and his dim eyeslooked straight before him. Darya Alexandrovna at that moment pitied himwith all her heart. "That was what I did indeed when she herself madeknown to me my humiliation; I left everything as of old. I gave her achance to reform, I tried to save her. And with what result? She wouldnot regard the slightest request—that she should observe decorum," hesaid, getting heated. "One may save anyone who does not want to beruined; but if the whole nature is so corrupt, so depraved, that ruinitself seems to be her salvation, what’s to be done?"
"Anything, only not divorce!" answered Darya Alexandrovna
"But what is anything?"
"No, it is awful! She will be no one’s wife, she will be lost!"
"What can I do?" said Alexey Alexandrovitch, raising his shoulders andhis eyebrows. The recollection of his wife’s last act had so incensedhim that he had become frigid, as at the beginning of the conversation."I am very grateful for your sympathy, but I must be going," he said,getting up.
"No, wait a minute. You must not ruin her. Wait a little; I will tellyou about myself. I was married, and my husband deceived me; in angerand jealousy, I would have thrown up everything, I would myself.... ButI came to myself again; and who did it? Anna saved me. And here I amliving on. The children are growing up, my husband has come back to hisfamily, and feels his fault, is growing purer, better, and I live on....I have forgiven it, and you ought to forgive!"
Alexey Alexandrovitch heard her, but her words had no effect on him now.All the hatred of that day when he had resolved on a divorce had sprungup again in his soul. He shook himself, and said in a shrill, loudvoice:—
"Forgive I cannot, and do not wish to, and I regard it as wrong. I havedone everything for this woman, and she has trodden it all in the mud towhich she is akin. I am not a spiteful man, I have never hated anyone,but I hate her with my whole soul, and I cannot even forgive her,because I hate her too much for all the wrong she has done me!" he said,with tones of hatred in his voice.
"Love those that hate you...." Darya Alexandrovna whispered timorously.
Alexey Alexandrovitch smiled contemptuously. That he knew long ago, butit could not be applied to his case.
"Love those that hate you, but to love those one hates is impossible.Forgive me for having troubled you. Everyone has enough to bear in hisown grief!" And regaining his self-possession, Alexey Alexandrovitchquietly took leave and went away.


Chapter 13

When they rose from table, Levin would have liked to follow Kitty intothe drawing room; but he was afraid she might dislike this, as tooobviously paying her attention. He remained in the little ring of men,taking part in the general conversation, and without looking at Kitty,he was aware of her movements, her looks, and the place where she was inthe drawing room.
He did at once, and without the smallest effort, keep the promise he hadmade her—always to think well of all men, and to like everyone always.The conversation fell on the village commune, in which Pestsov saw asort of special principle, called by him the choral principle. Levin didnot agree with Pestsov, nor with his brother, who had a special attitudeof his own, both admitting and not admitting the significance of theRussian commune. But he talked to them, simply trying to reconcile andsoften their differences. He was not in the least interested in what hesaid himself, and even less so in what they said; all he wanted was thatthey and everyone should be happy and contented. He knew now the onething of importance; and that one thing was at first there, in thedrawing room, and then began moving across and came to a standstill atthe door. Without turning round he felt the eyes fixed on him, and thesmile, and he could not help turning round. She was standing in thedoorway with Shtcherbatsky, looking at him.
"I thought you were going towards the piano," said he, going up to her."That’s something I miss in the country—music."
"No; we only came to fetch you and thank you," she said, rewarding himwith a smile that was like a gift, "for coming. What do they want toargue for? No one ever convinces anyone, you know."
"Yes; that’s true," said Levin; "it generally happens that one argueswarmly simply because one can’t make out what one’s opponent wants toprove."
Levin had often noticed in discussions between the most intelligentpeople that after enormous efforts, and an enormous expenditure oflogical subtleties and words, the disputants finally arrived at beingaware that what they had so long been struggling to prove to one anotherhad long ago, from the beginning of the argument, been known to both,but that they liked different things, and would not define what theyliked for fear of its being attacked. He had often had the experience ofsuddenly in a discussion grasping what it was his opponent liked and atonce liking it too, and immediately he found himself agreeing, and thenall arguments fell away as useless. Sometimes, too, he had experiencedthe opposite, expressing at last what he liked himself, which he wasdevising arguments to defend, and, chancing to express it well andgenuinely, he had found his opponent at once agreeing and ceasing todispute his position. He tried to say this.
She knitted her brow, trying to understand. But directly he began toillustrate his meaning, she understood at once.
"I know: one must find out what he is arguing for, what is precious tohim, then one can..."
She had completely guessed and expressed his badly expressed idea. Levinsmiled joyfully; he was struck by this transition from the confused,verbose discussion with Pestsov and his brother to this laconic, clear,almost wordless communication of the most complex ideas.
Shtcherbatsky moved away from them, and Kitty, going up to a card table,sat down, and, taking up the chalk, began drawing diverging circles overthe new green cloth.
They began again on the subject that had been started at dinner—theliberty and occupations of women. Levin was of the opinion of DaryaAlexandrovna that a girl who did not marry should find a woman’s dutiesin a family. He supported this view by the fact that no family can geton without women to help; that in every family, poor or rich, there areand must be nurses, either relations or hired.
"No," said Kitty, blushing, but looking at him all the more boldly withher truthful eyes; "a girl may be so circumstanced that she cannot livein the family without humiliation, while she herself..."
At the hint he understood her.
"Oh, yes," he said. "Yes, yes, yes—you’re right; you’re right!"
And he saw all that Pestsov had been maintaining at dinner of theliberty of woman, simply from getting a glimpse of the terror of an oldmaid’s existence and its humiliation in Kitty’s heart; and loving her,he felt that terror and humiliation, and at once gave up his arguments.
A silence followed. She was still drawing with the chalk on the table.Her eyes were shining with a soft light. Under the influence of her moodhe felt in all his being a continually growing tension of happiness.
"Ah! I’ve scribbled all over the table!" she said, and, laying down thechalk, she made a movement as though to get up.
"What! shall I be left alone—without her?" he thought with horror, andhe took the chalk. "Wait a minute," he said, sitting down to the table."I’ve long wanted to ask you one thing."
He looked straight into her caressing, though frightened eyes.
"Please, ask it."
"Here," he said; and he wrote the initial letters, _w, y, t, m, i, c, n,b, d, t, m, n, o, t_. These letters meant, "When you told me it couldnever be, did that mean never, or then?" There seemed no likelihood thatshe could make out this complicated sentence; but he looked at her asthough his life depended on her understanding the words. She glanced athim seriously, then leaned her puckered brow on her hands and began toread. Once or twice she stole a look at him, as though asking him, "Isit what I think?"
"I understand," she said, flushing a little.
"What is this word?" he said, pointing to the n that stood for _never_.
"It means _never_," she said; "but that’s not true!"
He quickly rubbed out what he had written, gave her the chalk, and stoodup. She wrote, _t, i, c, n, a, d_.
Dolly was completely comforted in the depression caused by herconversation with Alexey Alexandrovitch when she caught sight of the twofigures: Kitty with the chalk in her hand, with a shy and happy smilelooking upwards at Levin, and his handsome figure bending over the tablewith glowing eyes fastened one minute on the table and the next on her.He was suddenly radiant: he had understood. It meant, "Then I could notanswer differently."
He glanced at her questioningly, timidly.
"Only then?"
"Yes," her smile answered.
"And n... and now?" he asked.
"Well, read this. I’ll tell you what I should like—should like so much!"she wrote the initial letters, i, y, c, f, a, f, w, h. This meant, "Ifyou could forget and forgive what happened."
He snatched the chalk with nervous, trembling fingers, and breaking it,wrote the initial letters of the following phrase, "I have nothing toforget and to forgive; I have never ceased to love you."
She glanced at him with a smile that did not waver.
"I understand," she said in a whisper.
He sat down and wrote a long phrase. She understood it all, and withoutasking him, "Is it this?" took the chalk and at once answered.
For a long while he could not understand what she had written, and oftenlooked into her eyes. He was stupefied with happiness. He could notsupply the word she had meant; but in her charming eyes, beaming withhappiness, he saw all he needed to know. And he wrote three letters. Buthe had hardly finished writing when she read them over her arm, andherself finished and wrote the answer, "Yes."
"You’re playing _secrétaire_?" said the old prince. "But we must reallybe getting along if you want to be in time at the theater."
Levin got up and escorted Kitty to the door.
In their conversation everything had been said; it had been said thatshe loved him, and that she would tell her father and mother that hewould come tomorrow morning.


Chapter 14

When Kitty had gone and Levin was left alone, he felt such uneasinesswithout her, and such an impatient longing to get as quickly, as quicklyas possible, to tomorrow morning, when he would see her again and beplighted to her forever, that he felt afraid, as though of death, ofthose fourteen hours that he had to get through without her. It wasessential for him to be with someone to talk to, so as not to be leftalone, to kill time. Stepan Arkadyevitch would have been the companionmost congenial to him, but he was going out, he said, to a _soirée_, inreality to the ballet. Levin only had time to tell him he was happy, andthat he loved him, and would never, never forget what he had done forhim. The eyes and the smile of Stepan Arkadyevitch showed Levin that hecomprehended that feeling fittingly.
"Oh, so it’s not time to die yet?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, pressingLevin’s hand with emotion.
"N-n-no!" said Levin.
Darya Alexandrovna too, as she said good-bye to him, gave him a sort ofcongratulation, saying, "How glad I am you have met Kitty again! Onemust value old friends." Levin did not like these words of DaryaAlexandrovna’s. She could not understand how lofty and beyond her it allwas, and she ought not to have dared to allude to it. Levin saidgood-bye to them, but, not to be left alone, he attached himself to hisbrother.
"Where are you going?"
"I’m going to a meeting."
"Well, I’ll come with you. May I?"
"What for? Yes, come along," said Sergey Ivanovitch, smiling. "What isthe matter with you today?"
"With me? Happiness is the matter with me!" said Levin, letting down thewindow of the carriage they were driving in. "You don’t mind?—it’s sostifling. It’s happiness is the matter with me! Why is it you have nevermarried?"
Sergey Ivanovitch smiled.
"I am very glad, she seems a nice gi..." Sergey Ivanovitch wasbeginning.
"Don’t say it! don’t say it!" shouted Levin, clutching at the collar ofhis fur coat with both hands, and muffling him up in it. "She’s a nicegirl" were such simple, humble words, so out of harmony with hisfeeling.
Sergey Ivanovitch laughed outright a merry laugh, which was rare withhim. "Well, anyway, I may say that I’m very glad of it."
"That you may do tomorrow, tomorrow and nothing more! Nothing, nothing,silence," said Levin, and muffling him once more in his fur coat, headded: "I do like you so! Well, is it possible for me to be present atthe meeting?"
"Of course it is."
"What is your discussion about today?" asked Levin, never ceasingsmiling.
They arrived at the meeting. Levin heard the secretary hesitatingly readthe minutes which he obviously did not himself understand; but Levin sawfrom this secretary’s face what a good, nice, kind-hearted person hewas. This was evident from his confusion and embarrassment in readingthe minutes. Then the discussion began. They were disputing about themisappropriation of certain sums and the laying of certain pipes, andSergey Ivanovitch was very cutting to two members, and said something atgreat length with an air of triumph; and another member, scribblingsomething on a bit of paper, began timidly at first, but afterwardsanswered him very viciously and delightfully. And then Sviazhsky (he wasthere too) said something too, very handsomely and nobly. Levin listenedto them, and saw clearly that these missing sums and these pipes werenot anything real, and that they were not at all angry, but were all thenicest, kindest people, and everything was as happy and charming aspossible among them. They did no harm to anyone, and were all enjoyingit. What struck Levin was that he could see through them all today, andfrom little, almost imperceptible signs knew the soul of each, and sawdistinctly that they were all good at heart. And Levin himself inparticular they were all extremely fond of that day. That was evidentfrom the way they spoke to him, from the friendly, affectionate way eventhose he did not know looked at him.
"Well, did you like it?" Sergey Ivanovitch asked him.
"Very much. I never supposed it was so interesting! Capital! Splendid!"
Sviazhsky went up to Levin and invited him to come round to tea withhim. Levin was utterly at a loss to comprehend or recall what it was hehad disliked in Sviazhsky, what he had failed to find in him. He was aclever and wonderfully good-hearted man.
"Most delighted," he said, and asked after his wife and sister-in-law.And from a queer association of ideas, because in his imagination theidea of Sviazhsky’s sister-in-law was connected with marriage, itoccurred to him that there was no one to whom he could more suitablyspeak of his happiness, and he was very glad to go and see them.
Sviazhsky questioned him about his improvements on his estate,presupposing, as he always did, that there was no possibility of doinganything not done already in Europe, and now this did not in the leastannoy Levin. On the contrary, he felt that Sviazhsky was right, that thewhole business was of little value, and he saw the wonderful softnessand consideration with which Sviazhsky avoided fully expressing hiscorrect view. The ladies of the Sviazhsky household were particularlydelightful. It seemed to Levin that they knew all about it already andsympathized with him, saying nothing merely from delicacy. He stayedwith them one hour, two, three, talking of all sorts of subjects but theone thing that filled his heart, and did not observe that he was boringthem dreadfully, and that it was long past their bedtime.
Sviazhsky went with him into the hall, yawning and wondering at thestrange humor his friend was in. It was past one o’clock. Levin wentback to his hotel, and was dismayed at the thought that all alone nowwith his impatience he had ten hours still left to get through. Theservant, whose turn it was to be up all night, lighted his candles, andwould have gone away, but Levin stopped him. This servant, Yegor, whomLevin had noticed before, struck him as a very intelligent, excellent,and, above all, good-hearted man.
"Well, Yegor, it’s hard work not sleeping, isn’t it?"
"One’s got to put up with it! It’s part of our work, you see. In agentleman’s house it’s easier; but then here one makes more."
It appeared that Yegor had a family, three boys and a daughter, asempstress, whom he wanted to marry to a cashier in a saddler’s shop.
Levin, on hearing this, informed Yegor that, in his opinion, in marriagethe great thing was love, and that with love one would always be happy,for happiness rests only on oneself. Yegor listened attentively, andobviously quite took in Levin’s idea, but by way of assent to it heenunciated, greatly to Levin’s surprise, the observation that when hehad lived with good masters he had always been satisfied with hismasters, and now was perfectly satisfied with his employer, though hewas a Frenchman.
"Wonderfully good-hearted fellow!" thought Levin.
"Well, but you yourself, Yegor, when you got married, did you love yourwife?"
"Ay! and why not?" responded Yegor.
And Levin saw that Yegor too was in an excited state and intending toexpress all his most heartfelt emotions.
"My life, too, has been a wonderful one. From a child up..." he wasbeginning with flashing eyes, apparently catching Levin’s enthusiasm,just as people catch yawning.
But at that moment a ring was heard. Yegor departed, and Levin was leftalone. He had eaten scarcely anything at dinner, had refused tea andsupper at Sviazhsky’s, but he was incapable of thinking of supper. Hehad not slept the previous night, but was incapable of thinking of sleepeither. His room was cold, but he was oppressed by heat. He opened boththe movable panes in his window and sat down to the table opposite theopen panes. Over the snow-covered roofs could be seen a decorated crosswith chains, and above it the rising triangle of Charles’s Wain with theyellowish light of Capella. He gazed at the cross, then at the stars,drank in the fresh freezing air that flowed evenly into the room, andfollowed as though in a dream the images and memories that rose in hisimagination. At four o’clock he heard steps in the passage and peepedout at the door. It was the gambler Myaskin, whom he knew, coming fromthe club. He walked gloomily, frowning and coughing. "Poor, unluckyfellow!" thought Levin, and tears came into his eyes from love and pityfor this man. He would have talked with him, and tried to comfort him,but remembering that he had nothing but his shirt on, he changed hismind and sat down again at the open pane to bathe in the cold air andgaze at the exquisite lines of the cross, silent, but full of meaningfor him, and the mounting lurid yellow star. At seven o’clock there wasa noise of people polishing the floors, and bells ringing in someservants’ department, and Levin felt that he was beginning to getfrozen. He closed the pane, washed, dressed, and went out into thestreet.


Chapter 15

The streets were still empty. Levin went to the house of theShtcherbatskys. The visitors’ doors were closed and everything wasasleep. He walked back, went into his room again, and asked for coffee.The day servant, not Yegor this time, brought it to him. Levin wouldhave entered into conversation with him, but a bell rang for theservant, and he went out. Levin tried to drink coffee and put some rollin his mouth, but his mouth was quite at a loss what to do with theroll. Levin, rejecting the roll, put on his coat and went out again fora walk. It was nine o’clock when he reached the Shtcherbatskys’ stepsthe second time. In the house they were only just up, and the cook cameout to go marketing. He had to get through at least two hours more.
All that night and morning Levin lived perfectly unconsciously, and feltperfectly lifted out of the conditions of material life. He had eatennothing for a whole day, he had not slept for two nights, had spentseveral hours undressed in the frozen air, and felt not simply fresherand stronger than ever, but felt utterly independent of his body; hemoved without muscular effort, and felt as if he could do anything. Hewas convinced he could fly upwards or lift the corner of the house, ifneed be. He spent the remainder of the time in the street, incessantlylooking at his watch and gazing about him.
And what he saw then, he never saw again after. The children especiallygoing to school, the bluish doves flying down from the roofs to thepavement, and the little loaves covered with flour, thrust out by anunseen hand, touched him. Those loaves, those doves, and those two boyswere not earthly creatures. It all happened at the same time: a boy rantowards a dove and glanced smiling at Levin; the dove, with a whir ofher wings, darted away, flashing in the sun, amid grains of snow thatquivered in the air, while from a little window there came a smell offresh-baked bread, and the loaves were put out. All of this together wasso extraordinarily nice that Levin laughed and cried with delight. Goinga long way round by Gazetny Place and Kislovka, he went back again tothe hotel, and putting his watch before him, he sat down to wait fortwelve o’clock. In the next room they were talking about some sort ofmachines, and swindling, and coughing their morning coughs. They did notrealize that the hand was near twelve. The hand reached it. Levin wentout onto the steps. The sledge-drivers clearly knew all about it. Theycrowded round Levin with happy faces, quarreling among themselves, andoffering their services. Trying not to offend the other sledge drivers,and promising to drive with them too, Levin took one and told him todrive to the Shtcherbatskys’. The sledge-driver was splendid in a whiteshirt-collar sticking out over his overcoat and into his strong,full-blooded red neck. The sledge was high and comfortable, andaltogether such a one as Levin never drove in after, and the horse was agood one, and tried to gallop but didn’t seem to move. The driver knewthe Shtcherbatskys’ house, and drew up at the entrance with a curve ofhis arm and a "Wo!" especially indicative of respect for his fare. TheShtcherbatskys’ hall-porter certainly knew all about it. This wasevident from the smile in his eyes and the way he said:
"Well, it’s a long while since you’ve been to see us, KonstantinDemitrievitch!"
Not only he knew all about it, but he was unmistakably delighted andmaking efforts to conceal his joy. Looking into his kindly old eyes,Levin realized even something new in his happiness.
"Are they up?"
"Pray walk in! Leave it here," said he, smiling, as Levin would havecome back to take his hat. That meant something.
"To whom shall I announce your honor?" asked the footman.
The footman, though a young man, and one of the new school of footmen, adandy, was a very kind-hearted, good fellow, and he too knew all aboutit.
"The princess ... the prince ... the young princess..." said Levin.
The first person he saw was Mademoiselle Linon. She walked across theroom, and her ringlets and her face were beaming. He had only justspoken to her, when suddenly he heard the rustle of a skirt at the door,and Mademoiselle Linon vanished from Levin’s eyes, and a joyful terrorcame over him at the nearness of his happiness. Mademoiselle Linon wasin great haste, and leaving him, went out at the other door. Directlyshe had gone out, swift, swift light steps sounded on the parquet, andhis bliss, his life, himself—what was best in himself, what he had solong sought and longed for—was quickly, so quickly approaching him. Shedid not walk, but seemed, by some unseen force, to float to him. He sawnothing but her clear, truthful eyes, frightened by the same bliss oflove that flooded his heart. Those eyes were shining nearer and nearer,blinding him with their light of love. She stopped still close to him,touching him. Her hands rose and dropped onto his shoulders.
She had done all she could—she had run up to him and given herself upentirely, shy and happy. He put his arms round her and pressed his lipsto her mouth that sought his kiss.
She too had not slept all night, and had been expecting him all themorning.
Her mother and father had consented without demur, and were happy in herhappiness. She had been waiting for him. She wanted to be the first totell him her happiness and his. She had got ready to see him alone, andhad been delighted at the idea, and had been shy and ashamed, and didnot know herself what she was doing. She had heard his steps and voice,and had waited at the door for Mademoiselle Linon to go. MademoiselleLinon had gone away. Without thinking, without asking herself how andwhat, she had gone up to him, and did as she was doing.
"Let us go to mamma!" she said, taking him by the hand. For a long whilehe could say nothing, not so much because he was afraid of desecratingthe loftiness of his emotion by a word, as that every time he tried tosay something, instead of words he felt that tears of happiness werewelling up. He took her hand and kissed it.
"Can it be true?" he said at last in a choked voice. "I can’t believeyou love me, dear!"
She smiled at that "dear," and at the timidity with which he glanced ather.
"Yes!" she said significantly, deliberately. "I am so happy!"
Not letting go his hands, she went into the drawing room. The princess,seeing them, breathed quickly, and immediately began to cry and thenimmediately began to laugh, and with a vigorous step Levin had notexpected, ran up to him, and hugging his head, kissed him, wetting hischeeks with her tears.
"So it is all settled! I am glad. Love her. I am glad.... Kitty!"
"You’ve not been long settling things," said the old prince, trying toseem unmoved; but Levin noticed that his eyes were wet when he turned tohim.
"I’ve long, always wished for this!" said the prince, taking Levin bythe arm and drawing him towards himself. "Even when this littlefeather-head fancied..."
"Papa!" shrieked Kitty, and shut his mouth with her hands.
"Well, I won’t!" he said. "I’m very, very ... plea... Oh, what a fool Iam..."
He embraced Kitty, kissed her face, her hand, her face again, and madethe sign of the cross over her.
And there came over Levin a new feeling of love for this man, till thenso little known to him, when he saw how slowly and tenderly Kitty kissedhis muscular hand.


Chapter 16

The princess sat in her armchair, silent and smiling; the prince satdown beside her. Kitty stood by her father’s chair, still holding hishand. All were silent.
The princess was the first to put everything into words, and totranslate all thoughts and feelings into practical questions. And allequally felt this strange and painful for the first minute.
"When is it to be? We must have the benediction and announcement. Andwhen’s the wedding to be? What do you think, Alexander?"
"Here he is," said the old prince, pointing to Levin—"he’s the principalperson in the matter."
"When?" said Levin blushing. "Tomorrow; If you ask me, I should say, thebenediction today and the wedding tomorrow."
"Come, _mon cher_, that’s nonsense!"
"Well, in a week."
"He’s quite mad."
"No, why so?"
"Well, upon my word!" said the mother, smiling, delighted at this haste."How about the trousseau?"
"Will there really be a trousseau and all that?" Levin thought withhorror. "But can the trousseau and the benediction and all that—can itspoil my happiness? Nothing can spoil it!" He glanced at Kitty, andnoticed that she was not in the least, not in the very least, disturbedby the idea of the trousseau. "Then it must be all right," he thought.
"Oh, I know nothing about it; I only said what I should like," he saidapologetically.
"We’ll talk it over, then. The benediction and announcement can takeplace now. That’s very well."
The princess went up to her husband, kissed him, and would have goneaway, but he kept her, embraced her, and, tenderly as a young lover,kissed her several times, smiling. The old people were obviously muddledfor a moment, and did not quite know whether it was they who were inlove again or their daughter. When the prince and the princess had gone,Levin went up to his betrothed and took her hand. He was self-possessednow and could speak, and he had a great deal he wanted to tell her. Buthe said not at all what he had to say.
"How I knew it would be so! I never hoped for it; and yet in my heart Iwas always sure," he said. "I believe that it was ordained."
"And I!" she said. "Even when...." She stopped and went on again,looking at him resolutely with her truthful eyes, "Even when I thrustfrom me my happiness. I always loved you alone, but I was carried away.I ought to tell you.... Can you forgive that?"
"Perhaps it was for the best. You will have to forgive me so much. Iought to tell you..."
This was one of the things he had meant to speak about. He had resolvedfrom the first to tell her two things—that he was not chaste as she was,and that he was not a believer. It was agonizing, but he considered heought to tell her both these facts.
"No, not now, later!" he said.
"Very well, later, but you must certainly tell me. I’m not afraid ofanything. I want to know everything. Now it is settled."
He added: "Settled that you’ll take me whatever I may be—you won’t giveme up? Yes?"
"Yes, yes."
Their conversation was interrupted by Mademoiselle Linon, who with anaffected but tender smile came to congratulate her favorite pupil.Before she had gone, the servants came in with their congratulations.Then relations arrived, and there began that state of blissful absurdityfrom which Levin did not emerge till the day after his wedding. Levinwas in a continual state of awkwardness and discomfort, but theintensity of his happiness went on all the while increasing. He feltcontinually that a great deal was being expected of him—what, he did notknow; and he did everything he was told, and it all gave him happiness.He had thought his engagement would have nothing about it like others,that the ordinary conditions of engaged couples would spoil his specialhappiness; but it ended in his doing exactly as other people did, andhis happiness being only increased thereby and becoming more and morespecial, more and more unlike anything that had ever happened.
"Now we shall have sweetmeats to eat," said Mademoiselle Linon—and Levindrove off to buy sweetmeats.
"Well, I’m very glad," said Sviazhsky. "I advise you to get the bouquetsfrom Fomin’s."
"Oh, are they wanted?" And he drove to Fomin’s.
His brother offered to lend him money, as he would have so manyexpenses, presents to give....
"Oh, are presents wanted?" And he galloped to Foulde’s.
And at the confectioner’s, and at Fomin’s, and at Foulde’s he saw thathe was expected; that they were pleased to see him, and pridedthemselves on his happiness, just as every one whom he had to do withduring those days. What was extraordinary was that everyone not onlyliked him, but even people previously unsympathetic, cold, and callous,were enthusiastic over him, gave way to him in everything, treated hisfeeling with tenderness and delicacy, and shared his conviction that hewas the happiest man in the world because his betrothed was beyondperfection. Kitty too felt the same thing. When Countess Nordstonventured to hint that she had hoped for something better, Kitty was soangry and proved so conclusively that nothing in the world could bebetter than Levin, that Countess Nordston had to admit it, and inKitty’s presence never met Levin without a smile of ecstatic admiration.
The confession he had promised was the one painful incident of thistime. He consulted the old prince, and with his sanction gave Kitty hisdiary, in which there was written the confession that tortured him. Hehad written this diary at the time with a view to his future wife. Twothings caused him anguish: his lack of purity and his lack of faith. Hisconfession of unbelief passed unnoticed. She was religious, had neverdoubted the truths of religion, but his external unbelief did not affecther in the least. Through love she knew all his soul, and in his soulshe saw what she wanted, and that such a state of soul should be calledunbelieving was to her a matter of no account. The other confession sether weeping bitterly.
Levin, not without an inner struggle, handed her his diary. He knew thatbetween him and her there could not be, and should not be, secrets, andso he had decided that so it must be. But he had not realized what aneffect it would have on her, he had not put himself in her place. It wasonly when the same evening he came to their house before the theater,went into her room and saw her tear-stained, pitiful, sweet face,miserable with suffering he had caused and nothing could undo, he feltthe abyss that separated his shameful past from her dovelike purity, andwas appalled at what he had done.
"Take them, take these dreadful books!" she said, pushing away thenotebooks lying before her on the table. "Why did you give them me? No,it was better anyway," she added, touched by his despairing face. "Butit’s awful, awful!"
His head sank, and he was silent. He could say nothing.
"You can’t forgive me," he whispered.
"Yes, I forgive you; but it’s terrible!"
But his happiness was so immense that this confession did not shatterit, it only added another shade to it. She forgave him; but from thattime more than ever he considered himself unworthy of her, morally boweddown lower than ever before her, and prized more highly than ever hisundeserved happiness.


Chapter 17

Unconsciously going over in his memory the conversations that had takenplace during and after dinner, Alexey Alexandrovitch returned to hissolitary room. Darya Alexandrovna’s words about forgiveness had arousedin him nothing but annoyance. The applicability or non-applicability ofthe Christian precept to his own case was too difficult a question to bediscussed lightly, and this question had long ago been answered byAlexey Alexandrovitch in the negative. Of all that had been said, whatstuck most in his memory was the phrase of stupid, good-naturedTurovtsin—"_Acted like a man, he did! Called him out and shot him!_"Everyone had apparently shared this feeling, though from politeness theyhad not expressed it.
"But the matter is settled, it’s useless thinking about it," AlexeyAlexandrovitch told himself. And thinking of nothing but the journeybefore him, and the revision work he had to do, he went into his roomand asked the porter who escorted him where his man was. The porter saidthat the man had only just gone out. Alexey Alexandrovitch ordered teato be sent him, sat down to the table, and taking the guidebook, beganconsidering the route of his journey.
"Two telegrams," said his manservant, coming into the room. "I beg yourpardon, your excellency; I’d only just that minute gone out."
Alexey Alexandrovitch took the telegrams and opened them. The firsttelegram was the announcement of Stremov’s appointment to the very postKarenin had coveted. Alexey Alexandrovitch flung the telegram down, andflushing a little, got up and began to pace up and down the room. "_Quosvult perdere dementat_," he said, meaning by _quos_ the personsresponsible for this appointment. He was not so much annoyed that he hadnot received the post, that he had been conspicuously passed over; butit was incomprehensible, amazing to him that they did not see that thewordy phrase-monger Stremov was the last man fit for it. How could theyfail to see how they were ruining themselves, lowering their _prestige_by this appointment?
"Something else in the same line," he said to himself bitterly, openingthe second telegram. The telegram was from his wife. Her name, writtenin blue pencil, "Anna," was the first thing that caught his eye. "I amdying; I beg, I implore you to come. I shall die easier with yourforgiveness," he read. He smiled contemptuously, and flung down thetelegram. That this was a trick and a fraud, of that, he thought for thefirst minute, there could be no doubt.
"There is no deceit she would stick at. She was near her confinement.Perhaps it is the confinement. But what can be their aim? To legitimizethe child, to compromise me, and prevent a divorce," he thought. "Butsomething was said in it: I am dying...." He read the telegram again,and suddenly the plain meaning of what was said in it struck him.
"And if it is true?" he said to himself. "If it is true that in themoment of agony and nearness to death she is genuinely penitent, and I,taking it for a trick, refuse to go? That would not only be cruel, andeveryone would blame me, but it would be stupid on my part."
"Piotr, call a coach; I am going to Petersburg," he said to his servant.
Alexey Alexandrovitch decided that he would go to Petersburg and see hiswife. If her illness was a trick, he would say nothing and go awayagain. If she was really in danger, and wished to see him before herdeath, he would forgive her if he found her alive, and pay her the lastduties if he came too late.
All the way he thought no more of what he ought to do.
With a sense of weariness and uncleanness from the night spent in thetrain, in the early fog of Petersburg Alexey Alexandrovitch drovethrough the deserted Nevsky and stared straight before him, not thinkingof what was awaiting him. He could not think about it, because inpicturing what would happen, he could not drive away the reflection thather death would at once remove all the difficulty of his position.Bakers, closed shops, night-cabmen, porters sweeping the pavementsflashed past his eyes, and he watched it all, trying to smother thethought of what was awaiting him, and what he dared not hope for, andyet was hoping for. He drove up to the steps. A sledge and a carriagewith the coachman asleep stood at the entrance. As he went into theentry, Alexey Alexandrovitch, as it were, got out his resolution fromthe remotest corner of his brain, and mastered it thoroughly. Itsmeaning ran: "If it’s a trick, then calm contempt and departure. Iftruth, do what is proper."
The porter opened the door before Alexey Alexandrovitch rang. Theporter, Kapitonitch, looked queer in an old coat, without a tie, and inslippers.
"How is your mistress?"
"A successful confinement yesterday."
Alexey Alexandrovitch stopped short and turned white. He felt distinctlynow how intensely he had longed for her death.
"And how is she?"
Korney in his morning apron ran downstairs.
"Very ill," he answered. "There was a consultation yesterday, and thedoctor’s here now."
"Take my things," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, and feeling some relief atthe news that there was still hope of her death, he went into the hall.
On the hatstand there was a military overcoat. Alexey Alexandrovitchnoticed it and asked:
"Who is here?"
"The doctor, the midwife, and Count Vronsky."
Alexey Alexandrovitch went into the inner rooms.
In the drawing room there was no one; at the sound of his steps therecame out of her boudoir the midwife in a cap with lilac ribbons.
She went up to Alexey Alexandrovitch, and with the familiarity given bythe approach of death took him by the arm and drew him towards thebedroom.
"Thank God you’ve come! She keeps on about you and nothing but you," shesaid.
"Make haste with the ice!" the doctor’s peremptory voice said from thebedroom.
Alexey Alexandrovitch went into her boudoir.
At the table, sitting sideways in a low chair, was Vronsky, his facehidden in his hands, weeping. He jumped up at the doctor’s voice, tookhis hands from his face, and saw Alexey Alexandrovitch. Seeing thehusband, he was so overwhelmed that he sat down again, drawing his headdown to his shoulders, as if he wanted to disappear; but he made aneffort over himself, got up and said:
"She is dying. The doctors say there is no hope. I am entirely in yourpower, only let me be here ... though I am at your disposal. I..."
Alexey Alexandrovitch, seeing Vronsky’s tears, felt a rush of thatnervous emotion always produced in him by the sight of other people’ssuffering, and turning away his face, he moved hurriedly to the door,without hearing the rest of his words. From the bedroom came the soundof Anna’s voice saying something. Her voice was lively, eager, withexceedingly distinct intonations. Alexey Alexandrovitch went into thebedroom, and went up to the bed. She was lying turned with her facetowards him. Her cheeks were flushed crimson, her eyes glittered, herlittle white hands thrust out from the sleeves of her dressing gown wereplaying with the quilt, twisting it about. It seemed as though she werenot only well and blooming, but in the happiest frame of mind. She wastalking rapidly, musically, and with exceptionally correct articulationand expressive intonation.
"For Alexey—I am speaking of Alexey Alexandrovitch (what a strange andawful thing that both are Alexey, isn’t it?)—Alexey would not refuse me.I should forget, he would forgive.... But why doesn’t he come? He’s sogood he doesn’t know himself how good he is. Ah, my God, what agony!Give me some water, quick! Oh, that will be bad for her, my little girl!Oh, very well then, give her to a nurse. Yes, I agree, it’s better infact. He’ll be coming; it will hurt him to see her. Give her to thenurse."
"Anna Arkadyevna, he has come. Here he is!" said the midwife, trying toattract her attention to Alexey Alexandrovitch.
"Oh, what nonsense!" Anna went on, not seeing her husband. "No, give herto me; give me my little one! He has not come yet. You say he won’tforgive me, because you don’t know him. No one knows him. I’m the onlyone, and it was hard for me even. His eyes I ought to know—Seryozha hasjust the same eyes—and I can’t bear to see them because of it. HasSeryozha had his dinner? I know everyone will forget him. He would notforget. Seryozha must be moved into the corner room, and Mariette mustbe asked to sleep with him."
All of a sudden she shrank back, was silent; and in terror, as thoughexpecting a blow, as though to defend herself, she raised her hands toher face. She had seen her husband.
"No, no!" she began. "I am not afraid of him; I am afraid of death.Alexey, come here. I am in a hurry, because I’ve no time, I’ve not longleft to live; the fever will begin directly and I shall understandnothing more. Now I understand, I understand it all, I see it all!"
Alexey Alexandrovitch’s wrinkled face wore an expression of agony; hetook her by the hand and tried to say something, but he could not utterit; his lower lip quivered, but he still went on struggling with hisemotion, and only now and then glanced at her. And each time he glancedat her, he saw her eyes gazing at him with such passionate andtriumphant tenderness as he had never seen in them.
"Wait a minute, you don’t know ... stay a little, stay!..." She stopped,as though collecting her ideas. "Yes," she began; "yes, yes, yes. Thisis what I wanted to say. Don’t be surprised at me. I’m still thesame.... But there is another woman in me, I’m afraid of her: she lovedthat man, and I tried to hate you, and could not forget about her thatused to be. I’m not that woman. Now I’m my real self, all myself. I’mdying now, I know I shall die, ask him. Even now I feel—see here, theweights on my feet, on my hands, on my fingers. My fingers—see how hugethey are! But this will soon all be over.... Only one thing I want:forgive me, forgive me quite. I’m terrible, but my nurse used to tellme; the holy martyr—what was her name? She was worse. And I’ll go toRome; there’s a wilderness, and there I shall be no trouble to any one,only I’ll take Seryozha and the little one.... No, you can’t forgive me!I know, it can’t be forgiven! No, no, go away, you’re too good!" Sheheld his hand in one burning hand, while she pushed him away with theother.
The nervous agitation of Alexey Alexandrovitch kept increasing, and hadby now reached such a point that he ceased to struggle with it. Hesuddenly felt that what he had regarded as nervous agitation was on thecontrary a blissful spiritual condition that gave him all at once a newhappiness he had never known. He did not think that the Christian lawthat he had been all his life trying to follow, enjoined on him toforgive and love his enemies; but a glad feeling of love and forgivenessfor his enemies filled his heart. He knelt down, and laying his head inthe curve of her arm, which burned him as with fire through the sleeve,he sobbed like a little child. She put her arm around his head, movedtowards him, and with defiant pride lifted up her eyes.
"That is he. I knew him! Now, forgive me, everyone, forgive me!...They’ve come again; why don’t they go away?... Oh, take these cloaks offme!"
The doctor unloosed her hands, carefully laying her on the pillow, andcovered her up to the shoulders. She lay back submissively, and lookedbefore her with beaming eyes.
"Remember one thing, that I needed nothing but forgiveness, and I wantnothing more.... Why doesn’t _he_ come?" she said, turning to the doortowards Vronsky. "Do come, do come! Give him your hand."
Vronsky came to the side of the bed, and seeing Anna, again hid his facein his hands.
"Uncover your face—look at him! He’s a saint," she said. "Oh! uncoveryour face, do uncover it!" she said angrily. "Alexey Alexandrovitch, douncover his face! I want to see him."
Alexey Alexandrovitch took Vronsky’s hands and drew them away from hisface, which was awful with the expression of agony and shame upon it.
"Give him your hand. Forgive him."
Alexey Alexandrovitch gave him his hand, not attempting to restrain thetears that streamed from his eyes.
"Thank God, thank God!" she said, "now everything is ready. Only tostretch my legs a little. There, that’s capital. How badly these flowersare done—not a bit like a violet," she said, pointing to the hangings."My God, my God! when will it end? Give me some morphine. Doctor, giveme some morphine! Oh, my God, my God!"
And she tossed about on the bed.
The doctors said that it was puerperal fever, and that it wasninety-nine chances in a hundred it would end in death. The whole daylong there was fever, delirium, and unconsciousness. At midnight thepatient lay without consciousness, and almost without pulse.
The end was expected every minute.
Vronsky had gone home, but in the morning he came to inquire, and AlexeyAlexandrovitch meeting him in the hall, said: "Better stay, she mightask for you," and himself led him to his wife’s boudoir. Towardsmorning, there was a return again of excitement, rapid thought and talk,and again it ended in unconsciousness. On the third day it was the samething, and the doctors said there was hope. That day AlexeyAlexandrovitch went into the boudoir where Vronsky was sitting, andclosing the door sat down opposite him.
"Alexey Alexandrovitch," said Vronsky, feeling that a statement of theposition was coming, "I can’t speak, I can’t understand. Spare me!However hard it is for you, believe me, it is more terrible for me."
He would have risen; but Alexey Alexandrovitch took him by the hand andsaid:
"I beg you to hear me out; it is necessary. I must explain my feelings,the feelings that have guided me and will guide me, so that you may notbe in error regarding me. You know I had resolved on a divorce, and hadeven begun to take proceedings. I won’t conceal from you that inbeginning this I was in uncertainty, I was in misery; I will confessthat I was pursued by a desire to revenge myself on you and on her. WhenI got the telegram, I came here with the same feelings; I will say more,I longed for her death. But...." He paused, pondering whether todisclose or not to disclose his feeling to him. "But I saw her andforgave her. And the happiness of forgiveness has revealed to me myduty. I forgive completely. I would offer the other cheek, I would givemy cloak if my coat be taken. I pray to God only not to take from me thebliss of forgiveness!"
Tears stood in his eyes, and the luminous, serene look in them impressedVronsky.
"This is my position: you can trample me in the mud, make me thelaughing-stock of the world, I will not abandon her, and I will neverutter a word of reproach to you," Alexey Alexandrovitch went on. "Myduty is clearly marked for me; I ought to be with her, and I will be. Ifshe wishes to see you, I will let you know, but now I suppose it wouldbe better for you to go away."
He got up, and sobs cut short his words. Vronsky too was getting up, andin a stooping, not yet erect posture, looked up at him from under hisbrows. He did not understand Alexey Alexandrovitch’s feeling, but hefelt that it was something higher and even unattainable for him with hisview of life.


Chapter 18

After the conversation with Alexey Alexandrovitch, Vronsky went out ontothe steps of the Karenins’ house and stood still, with difficultyremembering where he was, and where he ought to walk or drive. He feltdisgraced, humiliated, guilty, and deprived of all possibility ofwashing away his humiliation. He felt thrust out of the beaten trackalong which he had so proudly and lightly walked till then. All thehabits and rules of his life that had seemed so firm, had turned outsuddenly false and inapplicable. The betrayed husband, who had figuredtill that time as a pitiful creature, an incidental and somewhatludicrous obstacle to his happiness, had suddenly been summoned by herherself, elevated to an awe-inspiring pinnacle, and on the pinnacle thathusband had shown himself, not malignant, not false, not ludicrous, butkind and straightforward and large. Vronsky could not but feel this, andthe parts were suddenly reversed. Vronsky felt his elevation and his ownabasement, his truth and his own falsehood. He felt that the husband wasmagnanimous even in his sorrow, while he had been base and petty in hisdeceit. But this sense of his own humiliation before the man he hadunjustly despised made up only a small part of his misery. He feltunutterably wretched now, for his passion for Anna, which had seemed tohim of late to be growing cooler, now that he knew he had lost herforever, was stronger than ever it had been. He had seen all of her inher illness, had come to know her very soul, and it seemed to him thathe had never loved her till then. And now when he had learned to knowher, to love her as she should be loved, he had been humiliated beforeher, and had lost her forever, leaving with her nothing of himself but ashameful memory. Most terrible of all had been his ludicrous, shamefulposition when Alexey Alexandrovitch had pulled his hands away from hishumiliated face. He stood on the steps of the Karenins’ house like onedistraught, and did not know what to do.
"A sledge, sir?" asked the porter.
"Yes, a sledge."
On getting home, after three sleepless nights, Vronsky, withoutundressing, lay down flat on the sofa, clasping his hands and laying hishead on them. His head was heavy. Images, memories, and ideas of thestrangest description followed one another with extraordinary rapidityand vividness. First it was the medicine he had poured out for thepatient and spilt over the spoon, then the midwife’s white hands, thenthe queer posture of Alexey Alexandrovitch on the floor beside the bed.
"To sleep! To forget!" he said to himself with the serene confidence ofa healthy man that if he is tired and sleepy, he will go to sleep atonce. And the same instant his head did begin to feel drowsy and hebegan to drop off into forgetfulness. The waves of the sea ofunconsciousness had begun to meet over his head, when all at once—it wasas though a violent shock of electricity had passed over him. He startedso that he leaped up on the springs of the sofa, and leaning on his armsgot in a panic onto his knees. His eyes were wide open as though he hadnever been asleep. The heaviness in his head and the weariness in hislimbs that he had felt a minute before had suddenly gone.
"You may trample me in the mud," he heard Alexey Alexandrovitch’s wordsand saw him standing before him, and saw Anna’s face with its burningflush and glittering eyes, gazing with love and tenderness not at himbut at Alexey Alexandrovitch; he saw his own, as he fancied, foolish andludicrous figure when Alexey Alexandrovitch took his hands away from hisface. He stretched out his legs again and flung himself on the sofa inthe same position and shut his eyes.
"To sleep! To forget!" he repeated to himself. But with his eyes shut hesaw more distinctly than ever Anna’s face as it had been on thememorable evening before the races.
"That is not and will not be, and she wants to wipe it out of hermemory. But I cannot live without it. How can we be reconciled? how canwe be reconciled?" he said aloud, and unconsciously began to repeatthese words. This repetition checked the rising up of fresh images andmemories, which he felt were thronging in his brain. But repeating wordsdid not check his imagination for long. Again in extraordinarily rapidsuccession his best moments rose before his mind, and then his recenthumiliation. "Take away his hands," Anna’s voice says. He takes away hishands and feels the shamestruck and idiotic expression of his face.
He still lay down, trying to sleep, though he felt there was not thesmallest hope of it, and kept repeating stray words from some chain ofthought, trying by this to check the rising flood of fresh images. Helistened, and heard in a strange, mad whisper words repeated: "I did notappreciate it, did not make enough of it. I did not appreciate it, didnot make enough of it."
"What’s this? Am I going out of my mind?" he said to himself. "Perhaps.What makes men go out of their minds; what makes men shoot themselves?"he answered himself, and opening his eyes, he saw with wonder anembroidered cushion beside him, worked by Varya, his brother’s wife. Hetouched the tassel of the cushion, and tried to think of Varya, of whenhe had seen her last. But to think of anything extraneous was anagonizing effort. "No, I must sleep!" He moved the cushion up, andpressed his head into it, but he had to make an effort to keep his eyesshut. He jumped up and sat down. "That’s all over for me," he said tohimself. "I must think what to do. What is left?" His mind rapidly ranthrough his life apart from his love of Anna.
"Ambition? Serpuhovskoy? Society? The court?" He could not come to apause anywhere. All of it had had meaning before, but now there was noreality in it. He got up from the sofa, took off his coat, undid hisbelt, and uncovering his hairy chest to breathe more freely, walked upand down the room. "This is how people go mad," he repeated, "and howthey shoot themselves ... to escape humiliation," he added slowly.
He went to the door and closed it, then with fixed eyes and clenchedteeth he went up to the table, took a revolver, looked round him, turnedit to a loaded barrel, and sank into thought. For two minutes, his headbent forward with an expression of an intense effort of thought, hestood with the revolver in his hand, motionless, thinking.
"Of course," he said to himself, as though a logical, continuous, andclear chain of reasoning had brought him to an indubitable conclusion.In reality this "of course," that seemed convincing to him, was simplythe result of exactly the same circle of memories and images throughwhich he had passed ten times already during the last hour—memories ofhappiness lost forever. There was the same conception of thesenselessness of everything to come in life, the same consciousness ofhumiliation. Even the sequence of these images and emotions was thesame.
"Of course," he repeated, when for the third time his thought passedagain round the same spellbound circle of memories and images, andpulling the revolver to the left side of his chest, and clutching itvigorously with his whole hand, as it were, squeezing it in his fist, hepulled the trigger. He did not hear the sound of the shot, but a violentblow on his chest sent him reeling. He tried to clutch at the edge ofthe table, dropped the revolver, staggered, and sat down on the ground,looking about him in astonishment. He did not recognize his room,looking up from the ground, at the bent legs of the table, at thewastepaper basket, and the tiger-skin rug. The hurried, creaking stepsof his servant coming through the drawing room brought him to hissenses. He made an effort at thought, and was aware that he was on thefloor; and seeing blood on the tiger-skin rug and on his arm, he knew hehad shot himself.
"Idiotic! Missed!" he said, fumbling after the revolver. The revolverwas close beside him—he sought further off. Still feeling for it, hestretched out to the other side, and not being strong enough to keep hisbalance, fell over, streaming with blood.
The elegant, whiskered manservant, who used to be continuallycomplaining to his acquaintances of the delicacy of his nerves, was sopanic-stricken on seeing his master lying on the floor, that he left himlosing blood while he ran for assistance. An hour later Varya, hisbrother’s wife, had arrived, and with the assistance of three doctors,whom she had sent for in all directions, and who all appeared at thesame moment, she got the wounded man to bed, and remained to nurse him.


Chapter 19

The mistake made by Alexey Alexandrovitch in that, when preparing forseeing his wife, he had overlooked the possibility that her repentancemight be sincere, and he might forgive her, and she might not die—thismistake was two months after his return from Moscow brought home to himin all its significance. But the mistake made by him had arisen notsimply from his having overlooked that contingency, but also from thefact that until that day of his interview with his dying wife, he hadnot known his own heart. At his sick wife’s bedside he had for the firsttime in his life given way to that feeling of sympathetic sufferingalways roused in him by the sufferings of others, and hitherto looked onby him with shame as a harmful weakness. And pity for her, and remorsefor having desired her death, and most of all, the joy of forgiveness,made him at once conscious, not simply of the relief of his ownsufferings, but of a spiritual peace he had never experienced before. Hesuddenly felt that the very thing that was the source of his sufferingshad become the source of his spiritual joy; that what had seemedinsoluble while he was judging, blaming, and hating, had become clearand simple when he forgave and loved.
He forgave his wife and pitied her for her sufferings and her remorse.He forgave Vronsky, and pitied him, especially after reports reached himof his despairing action. He felt more for his son than before. And heblamed himself now for having taken too little interest in him. But forthe little newborn baby he felt a quite peculiar sentiment, not of pity,only, but of tenderness. At first, from a feeling of compassion alone,he had been interested in the delicate little creature, who was not hischild, and who was cast on one side during her mother’s illness, andwould certainly have died if he had not troubled about her, and he didnot himself observe how fond he became of her. He would go into thenursery several times a day, and sit there for a long while, so that thenurses, who were at first afraid of him, got quite used to his presence.Sometimes for half an hour at a stretch he would sit silently gazing atthe saffron-red, downy, wrinkled face of the sleeping baby, watching themovements of the frowning brows, and the fat little hands, with clenchedfingers, that rubbed the little eyes and nose. At such momentsparticularly, Alexey Alexandrovitch had a sense of perfect peace andinward harmony, and saw nothing extraordinary in his position, nothingthat ought to be changed.
But as time went on, he saw more and more distinctly that howevernatural the position now seemed to him, he would not long be allowed toremain in it. He felt that besides the blessed spiritual forcecontrolling his soul, there was another, a brutal force, as powerful, ormore powerful, which controlled his life, and that this force would notallow him that humble peace he longed for. He felt that everyone waslooking at him with inquiring wonder, that he was not understood, andthat something was expected of him. Above all, he felt the instabilityand unnaturalness of his relations with his wife.
When the softening effect of the near approach of death had passed away,Alexey Alexandrovitch began to notice that Anna was afraid of him, illat ease with him, and could not look him straight in the face. Sheseemed to be wanting, and not daring, to tell him something; and asthough foreseeing their present relations could not continue, she seemedto be expecting something from him.
Towards the end of February it happened that Anna’s baby daughter, whohad been named Anna too, fell ill. Alexey Alexandrovitch was in thenursery in the morning, and leaving orders for the doctor to be sentfor, he went to his office. On finishing his work, he returned home atfour. Going into the hall he saw a handsome groom, in a braided liveryand a bear fur cape, holding a white fur cloak.
"Who is here?" asked Alexey Alexandrovitch.
"Princess Elizaveta Federovna Tverskaya," the groom answered, and itseemed to Alexey Alexandrovitch that he grinned.
During all this difficult time Alexey Alexandrovitch had noticed thathis worldly acquaintances, especially women, took a peculiar interest inhim and his wife. All these acquaintances he observed with difficultyconcealing their mirth at something; the same mirth that he hadperceived in the lawyer’s eyes, and just now in the eyes of this groom.Everyone seemed, somehow, hugely delighted, as though they had just beenat a wedding. When they met him, with ill-disguised enjoyment theyinquired after his wife’s health. The presence of Princess Tverskaya wasunpleasant to Alexey Alexandrovitch from the memories associated withher, and also because he disliked her, and he went straight to thenursery. In the day nursery Seryozha, leaning on the table with his legson a chair, was drawing and chatting away merrily. The Englishgoverness, who had during Anna’s illness replaced the French one, wassitting near the boy knitting a shawl. She hurriedly got up, curtseyed,and pulled Seryozha.
Alexey Alexandrovitch stroked his son’s hair, answered the governess’sinquiries about his wife, and asked what the doctor had said of thebaby.
"The doctor said it was nothing serious, and he ordered a bath, sir."
"But she is still in pain," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, listening to thebaby’s screaming in the next room.
"I think it’s the wet-nurse, sir," the Englishwoman said firmly.
"What makes you think so?" he asked, stopping short.
"It’s just as it was at Countess Paul’s, sir. They gave the babymedicine, and it turned out that the baby was simply hungry: the nursehad no milk, sir."
Alexey Alexandrovitch pondered, and after standing still a few secondshe went in at the other door. The baby was lying with its head thrownback, stiffening itself in the nurse’s arms, and would not take theplump breast offered it; and it never ceased screaming in spite of thedouble hushing of the wet-nurse and the other nurse, who was bendingover her.
"Still no better?" said Alexey Alexandrovitch.
"She’s very restless," answered the nurse in a whisper.
"Miss Edwarde says that perhaps the wet-nurse has no milk," he said.
"I think so too, Alexey Alexandrovitch."
"Then why didn’t you say so?"
"Who’s one to say it to? Anna Arkadyevna still ill..." said the nursediscontentedly.
The nurse was an old servant of the family. And in her simple wordsthere seemed to Alexey Alexandrovitch an allusion to his position.
The baby screamed louder than ever, struggling and sobbing. The nurse,with a gesture of despair, went to it, took it from the wet-nurse’sarms, and began walking up and down, rocking it.
"You must ask the doctor to examine the wet-nurse," said AlexeyAlexandrovitch. The smartly dressed and healthy-looking nurse,frightened at the idea of losing her place, muttered something toherself, and covering her bosom, smiled contemptuously at the idea ofdoubts being cast on her abundance of milk. In that smile, too, AlexeyAlexandrovitch saw a sneer at his position.
"Luckless child!" said the nurse, hushing the baby, and still walking upand down with it.
Alexey Alexandrovitch sat down, and with a despondent and suffering facewatched the nurse walking to and fro.
When the child at last was still, and had been put in a deep bed, andthe nurse, after smoothing the little pillow, had left her, AlexeyAlexandrovitch got up, and walking awkwardly on tiptoe, approached thebaby. For a minute he was still, and with the same despondent face gazedat the baby; but all at once a smile, that moved his hair and the skinof his forehead, came out on his face, and he went as softly out of theroom.
In the dining room he rang the bell, and told the servant who came in tosend again for the doctor. He felt vexed with his wife for not beinganxious about this exquisite baby, and in this vexed humor he had nowish to go to her; he had no wish, either, to see Princess Betsy. Buthis wife might wonder why he did not go to her as usual; and so,overcoming his disinclination, he went towards the bedroom. As he walkedover the soft rug towards the door, he could not help overhearing aconversation he did not want to hear.
"If he hadn’t been going away, I could have understood your answer andhis too. But your husband ought to be above that," Betsy was saying.
"It’s not for my husband; for myself I don’t wish it. Don’t say that!"answered Anna’s excited voice.
"Yes, but you must care to say good-bye to a man who has shot himself onyour account...."
"That’s just why I don’t want to."
With a dismayed and guilty expression, Alexey Alexandrovitch stopped andwould have gone back unobserved. But reflecting that this would beundignified, he turned back again, and clearing his throat, he went upto the bedroom. The voices were silent, and he went in.
Anna, in a gray dressing gown, with a crop of short clustering blackcurls on her round head, was sitting on a settee. The eagerness died outof her face, as it always did, at the sight of her husband; she droppedher head and looked round uneasily at Betsy. Betsy, dressed in theheight of the latest fashion, in a hat that towered somewhere over herhead like a shade on a lamp, in a blue dress with violet crosswaystripes slanting one way on the bodice and the other way on the skirt,was sitting beside Anna, her tall flat figure held erect. Bowing herhead, she greeted Alexey Alexandrovitch with an ironical smile.
"Ah!" she said, as though surprised. "I’m very glad you’re at home. Younever put in an appearance anywhere, and I haven’t seen you ever sinceAnna has been ill. I have heard all about it—your anxiety. Yes, you’re awonderful husband!" she said, with a meaning and affable air, as thoughshe were bestowing an order of magnanimity on him for his conduct to hiswife.
Alexey Alexandrovitch bowed frigidly, and kissing his wife’s hand, askedhow she was.
"Better, I think," she said, avoiding his eyes.
"But you’ve rather a feverish-looking color," he said, laying stress onthe word "feverish."
"We’ve been talking too much," said Betsy. "I feel it’s selfishness onmy part, and I am going away."
She got up, but Anna, suddenly flushing, quickly caught at her hand.
"No, wait a minute, please. I must tell you ... no, you." she turned toAlexey Alexandrovitch, and her neck and brow were suffused with crimson."I won’t and can’t keep anything secret from you," she said.
Alexey Alexandrovitch cracked his fingers and bowed his head.
"Betsy’s been telling me that Count Vronsky wants to come here to saygood-bye before his departure for Tashkend." She did not look at herhusband, and was evidently in haste to have everything out, however hardit might be for her. "I told her I could not receive him."
"You said, my dear, that it would depend on Alexey Alexandrovitch,"Betsy corrected her.
"Oh, no, I can’t receive him; and what object would there...." Shestopped suddenly, and glanced inquiringly at her husband (he did notlook at her). "In short, I don’t wish it...."
Alexey Alexandrovitch advanced and would have taken her hand.
Her first impulse was to jerk back her hand from the damp hand with bigswollen veins that sought hers, but with an obvious effort to controlherself she pressed his hand.
"I am very grateful to you for your confidence, but..." he said, feelingwith confusion and annoyance that what he could decide easily andclearly by himself, he could not discuss before Princess Tverskaya, whoto him stood for the incarnation of that brute force which wouldinevitably control him in the life he led in the eyes of the world, andhinder him from giving way to his feeling of love and forgiveness. Hestopped short, looking at Princess Tverskaya.
"Well, good-bye, my darling," said Betsy, getting up. She kissed Anna,and went out. Alexey Alexandrovitch escorted her out.
"Alexey Alexandrovitch! I know you are a truly magnanimous man," saidBetsy, stopping in the little drawing-room, and with special warmthshaking hands with him once more. "I am an outsider, but I so love herand respect you that I venture to advise. Receive him. Alexey Vronsky isthe soul of honor, and he is going away to Tashkend."
"Thank you, princess, for your sympathy and advice. But the question ofwhether my wife can or cannot see anyone she must decide herself."
He said this from habit, lifting his brows with dignity, and reflectedimmediately that whatever his words might be, there could be no dignityin his position. And he saw this by the suppressed, malicious, andironical smile with which Betsy glanced at him after this phrase.


Chapter 20

Alexey Alexandrovitch took leave of Betsy in the drawing room, and wentto his wife. She was lying down, but hearing his steps she sat uphastily in her former attitude, and looked in a scared way at him. Hesaw she had been crying.
"I am very grateful for your confidence in me." He repeated gently inRussian the phrase he had said in Betsy’s presence in French, and satdown beside her. When he spoke to her in Russian, using the Russian"thou" of intimacy and affection, it was insufferably irritating toAnna. "And I am very grateful for your decision. I, too, imagine thatsince he is going away, there is no sort of necessity for Count Vronskyto come here. However, if..."
"But I’ve said so already, so why repeat it?" Anna suddenly interruptedhim with an irritation she could not succeed in repressing. "No sort ofnecessity," she thought, "for a man to come and say good-bye to thewoman he loves, for whom he was ready to ruin himself, and has ruinedhimself, and who cannot live without him. No sort of necessity!" shecompressed her lips, and dropped her burning eyes to his hands withtheir swollen veins. They were rubbing each other.
"Let us never speak of it," she added more calmly.
"I have left this question to you to decide, and I am very glad tosee..." Alexey Alexandrovitch was beginning.
"That my wish coincides with your own," she finished quickly,exasperated at his talking so slowly while she knew beforehand all hewould say.
"Yes," he assented; "and Princess Tverskaya’s interference in the mostdifficult private affairs is utterly uncalled for. She especially..."
"I don’t believe a word of what’s said about her," said Anna quickly. "Iknow she really cares for me."
Alexey Alexandrovitch sighed and said nothing. She played nervously withthe tassel of her dressing-gown, glancing at him with that torturingsensation of physical repulsion for which she blamed herself, though shecould not control it. Her only desire now was to be rid of hisoppressive presence.
"I have just sent for the doctor," said Alexey Alexandrovitch.
"I am very well; what do I want the doctor for?"
"No, the little one cries, and they say the nurse hasn’t enough milk."
"Why didn’t you let me nurse her, when I begged to? Anyway" (AlexeyAlexandrovitch knew what was meant by that "anyway"), "she’s a baby, andthey’re killing her." She rang the bell and ordered the baby to bebrought her. "I begged to nurse her, I wasn’t allowed to, and now I’mblamed for it."
"I don’t blame..."
"Yes, you do blame me! My God! why didn’t I die!" And she broke intosobs. "Forgive me, I’m nervous, I’m unjust," she said, controllingherself, "but do go away..."
"No, it can’t go on like this," Alexey Alexandrovitch said to himselfdecidedly as he left his wife’s room.
Never had the impossibility of his position in the world’s eyes, and hiswife’s hatred of him, and altogether the might of that mysterious brutalforce that guided his life against his spiritual inclinations, andexacted conformity with its decrees and change in his attitude to hiswife, been presented to him with such distinctness as that day. He sawclearly that all the world and his wife expected of him something, butwhat exactly, he could not make out. He felt that this was rousing inhis soul a feeling of anger destructive of his peace of mind and of allthe good of his achievement. He believed that for Anna herself it wouldbe better to break off all relations with Vronsky; but if they allthought this out of the question, he was even ready to allow theserelations to be renewed, so long as the children were not disgraced, andhe was not deprived of them nor forced to change his position. Bad asthis might be, it was anyway better than a rupture, which would put herin a hopeless and shameful position, and deprive him of everything hecared for. But he felt helpless; he knew beforehand that every one wasagainst him, and that he would not be allowed to do what seemed to himnow so natural and right, but would be forced to do what was wrong,though it seemed the proper thing to them.


Chapter 21

Before Betsy had time to walk out of the drawing-room, she was met inthe doorway by Stepan Arkadyevitch, who had just come from Yeliseev’s,where a consignment of fresh oysters had been received.
"Ah! princess! what a delightful meeting!" he began. "I’ve been to seeyou."
"A meeting for one minute, for I’m going," said Betsy, smiling andputting on her glove.
"Don’t put on your glove yet, princess; let me kiss your hand. There’snothing I’m so thankful to the revival of the old fashions for as thekissing the hand." He kissed Betsy’s hand. "When shall we see eachother?"
"You don’t deserve it," answered Betsy, smiling.
"Oh, yes, I deserve a great deal, for I’ve become a most serious person.I don’t only manage my own affairs, but other people’s too," he said,with a significant expression.
"Oh, I’m so glad!" answered Betsy, at once understanding that he wasspeaking of Anna. And going back into the drawing room, they stood in acorner. "He’s killing her," said Betsy in a whisper full of meaning."It’s impossible, impossible..."
"I’m so glad you think so," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, shaking his headwith a serious and sympathetically distressed expression, "that’s whatI’ve come to Petersburg for."
"The whole town’s talking of it," she said. "It’s an impossibleposition. She pines and pines away. He doesn’t understand that she’s oneof those women who can’t trifle with their feelings. One of two things:either let him take her away, act with energy, or give her a divorce.This is stifling her."
"Yes, yes ... just so..." Oblonsky said, sighing. "That’s what I’ve comefor. At least not solely for that ... I’ve been made a _Kammerherr_; ofcourse, one has to say thank you. But the chief thing was having tosettle this."
"Well, God help you!" said Betsy.
After accompanying Betsy to the outside hall, once more kissing her handabove the glove, at the point where the pulse beats, and murmuring toher such unseemly nonsense that she did not know whether to laugh or beangry, Stepan Arkadyevitch went to his sister. He found her in tears.
Although he happened to be bubbling over with good spirits, StepanArkadyevitch immediately and quite naturally fell into the sympathetic,poetically emotional tone which harmonized with her mood. He asked herhow she was, and how she had spent the morning.
"Very, very miserably. Today and this morning and all past days and daysto come," she said.
"I think you’re giving way to pessimism. You must rouse yourself, youmust look life in the face. I know it’s hard, but..."
"I have heard it said that women love men even for their vices," Annabegan suddenly, "but I hate him for his virtues. I can’t live with him.Do you understand? the sight of him has a physical effect on me, itmakes me beside myself. I can’t, I can’t live with him. What am I to do?I have been unhappy, and used to think one couldn’t be more unhappy, butthe awful state of things I am going through now, I could never haveconceived. Would you believe it, that knowing he’s a good man, asplendid man, that I’m not worth his little finger, still I hate him. Ihate him for his generosity. And there’s nothing left for me but..."
She would have said death, but Stepan Arkadyevitch would not let herfinish.
"You are ill and overwrought," he said; "believe me, you’re exaggeratingdreadfully. There’s nothing so terrible in it."
And Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled. No one else in Stepan Arkadyevitch’splace, having to do with such despair, would have ventured to smile (thesmile would have seemed brutal); but in his smile there was so much ofsweetness and almost feminine tenderness that his smile did not wound,but softened and soothed. His gentle, soothing words and smiles were assoothing and softening as almond oil. And Anna soon felt this.
"No, Stiva," she said, "I’m lost, lost! worse than lost! I can’t say yetthat all is over; on the contrary, I feel that it’s not over. I’m anoverstrained string that must snap. But it’s not ended yet ... and itwill have a fearful end."
"No matter, we must let the string be loosened, little by little.There’s no position from which there is no way of escape."
"I have thought, and thought. Only one..."
Again he knew from her terrified eyes that this one way of escape in herthought was death, and he would not let her say it.
"Not at all," he said. "Listen to me. You can’t see your own position asI can. Let me tell you candidly my opinion." Again he smiled discreetlyhis almond-oil smile. "I’ll begin from the beginning. You married a mantwenty years older than yourself. You married him without love and notknowing what love was. It was a mistake, let’s admit."
"A fearful mistake!" said Anna.
"But I repeat, it’s an accomplished fact. Then you had, let us say, themisfortune to love a man not your husband. That was a misfortune; butthat, too, is an accomplished fact. And your husband knew it and forgaveit." He stopped at each sentence, waiting for her to object, but shemade no answer. "That’s so. Now the question is: can you go on livingwith your husband? Do you wish it? Does he wish it?"
"I know nothing, nothing."
"But you said yourself that you can’t endure him."
"No, I didn’t say so. I deny it. I can’t tell, I don’t know anythingabout it."
"Yes, but let..."
"You can’t understand. I feel I’m lying head downwards in a sort of pit,but I ought not to save myself. And I can’t . . ."
"Never mind, we’ll slip something under and pull you out. I understandyou: I understand that you can’t take it on yourself to express yourwishes, your feelings."
"There’s nothing, nothing I wish ... except for it to be all over."
"But he sees this and knows it. And do you suppose it weighs on him anyless than on you? You’re wretched, he’s wretched, and what good can comeof it? while divorce would solve the difficulty completely." With someeffort Stepan Arkadyevitch brought out his central idea, and lookedsignificantly at her.
She said nothing, and shook her cropped head in dissent. But from thelook in her face, that suddenly brightened into its old beauty, he sawthat if she did not desire this, it was simply because it seemed to herunattainable happiness.
"I’m awfully sorry for you! And how happy I should be if I could arrangethings!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling more boldly. "Don’t speak,don’t say a word! God grant only that I may speak as I feel. I’m goingto him."
Anna looked at him with dreamy, shining eyes, and said nothing.


Chapter 22

Stepan Arkadyevitch, with the same somewhat solemn expression with whichhe used to take his presidential chair at his board, walked into AlexeyAlexandrovitch’s room. Alexey Alexandrovitch was walking about his roomwith his hands behind his back, thinking of just what StepanArkadyevitch had been discussing with his wife.
"I’m not interrupting you?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, on the sight ofhis brother-in-law becoming suddenly aware of a sense of embarrassmentunusual with him. To conceal this embarrassment he took out a cigarettecase he had just bought that opened in a new way, and sniffing theleather, took a cigarette out of it.
"No. Do you want anything?" Alexey Alexandrovitch asked withouteagerness.
"Yes, I wished ... I wanted ... yes, I wanted to talk to you," saidStepan Arkadyevitch, with surprise aware of an unaccustomed timidity.
This feeling was so unexpected and so strange that he did not believe itwas the voice of conscience telling him that what he was meaning to dowas wrong.
Stepan Arkadyevitch made an effort and struggled with the timidity thathad come over him.
"I hope you believe in my love for my sister and my sincere affectionand respect for you," he said, reddening.
Alexey Alexandrovitch stood still and said nothing, but his face struckStepan Arkadyevitch by its expression of an unresisting sacrifice.
"I intended ... I wanted to have a little talk with you about my sisterand your mutual position," he said, still struggling with anunaccustomed constraint.
Alexey Alexandrovitch smiled mournfully, looked at his brother-in-law,and without answering went up to the table, took from it an unfinishedletter, and handed it to his brother-in-law.
"I think unceasingly of the same thing. And here is what I had begunwriting, thinking I could say it better by letter, and that my presenceirritates her," he said, as he gave him the letter.
Stepan Arkadyevitch took the letter, looked with incredulous surprise atthe lusterless eyes fixed so immovably on him, and began to read.
"I see that my presence is irksome to you. Painful as it is to me tobelieve it, I see that it is so, and cannot be otherwise. I don’t blameyou, and God is my witness that on seeing you at the time of yourillness I resolved with my whole heart to forget all that had passedbetween us and to begin a new life. I do not regret, and shall neverregret, what I have done; but I have desired one thing—your good, thegood of your soul—and now I see I have not attained that. Tell meyourself what will give you true happiness and peace to your soul. I putmyself entirely in your hands, and trust to your feeling of what’sright."
Stepan Arkadyevitch handed back the letter, and with the same surprisecontinued looking at his brother-in-law, not knowing what to say. Thissilence was so awkward for both of them that Stepan Arkadyevitch’s lipsbegan twitching nervously, while he still gazed without speaking atKarenin’s face.
"That’s what I wanted to say to her," said Alexey Alexandrovitch,turning away.
"Yes, yes..." said Stepan Arkadyevitch, not able to answer for the tearsthat were choking him.
"Yes, yes, I understand you," he brought out at last.
"I want to know what she would like," said Alexey Alexandrovitch.
"I am afraid she does not understand her own position. She is not ajudge," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, recovering himself. "She is crushed,simply crushed by your generosity. If she were to read this letter, shewould be incapable of saying anything, she would only hang her headlower than ever."
"Yes, but what’s to be done in that case? how explain, how find out herwishes?"
"If you will allow me to give my opinion, I think that it lies with youto point out directly the steps you consider necessary to end theposition."
"So you consider it must be ended?" Alexey Alexandrovitch interruptedhim. "But how?" he added, with a gesture of his hands before his eyesnot usual with him. "I see no possible way out of it."
"There is some way of getting out of every position," said StepanArkadyevitch, standing up and becoming more cheerful. "There was a timewhen you thought of breaking off.... If you are convinced now that youcannot make each other happy..."
"Happiness may be variously understood. But suppose that I agree toeverything, that I want nothing: what way is there of getting out of ourposition?"
"If you care to know my opinion," said Stepan Arkadyevitch with the samesmile of softening, almond-oil tenderness with which he had been talkingto Anna. His kindly smile was so winning that Alexey Alexandrovitch,feeling his own weakness and unconsciously swayed by it, was ready tobelieve what Stepan Arkadyevitch was saying.
"She will never speak out about it. But one thing is possible, one thingshe might desire," he went on, "that is the cessation of your relationsand all memories associated with them. To my thinking, in your positionwhat’s essential is the formation of a new attitude to one another. Andthat can only rest on a basis of freedom on both sides."
"Divorce," Alexey Alexandrovitch interrupted, in a tone of aversion.
"Yes, I imagine that divorce—yes, divorce," Stepan Arkadyevitchrepeated, reddening. "That is from every point of view the most rationalcourse for married people who find themselves in the position you arein. What can be done if married people find that life is impossible forthem together? That may always happen."
Alexey Alexandrovitch sighed heavily and closed his eyes.
"There’s only one point to be considered: is either of the partiesdesirous of forming new ties? If not, it is very simple," said StepanArkadyevitch, feeling more and more free from constraint.
Alexey Alexandrovitch, scowling with emotion, muttered something tohimself, and made no answer. All that seemed so simple to StepanArkadyevitch, Alexey Alexandrovitch had thought over thousands of times.And, so far from being simple, it all seemed to him utterly impossible.Divorce, the details of which he knew by this time, seemed to him nowout of the question, because the sense of his own dignity and respectfor religion forbade his taking upon himself a fictitious charge ofadultery, and still more suffering his wife, pardoned and beloved byhim, to be caught in the fact and put to public shame. Divorce appearedto him impossible also on other still more weighty grounds.
What would become of his son in case of a divorce? To leave him with hismother was out of the question. The divorced mother would have her ownillegitimate family, in which his position as a stepson and hiseducation would not be good. Keep him with him? He knew that would be anact of vengeance on his part, and that he did not want. But apart fromthis, what more than all made divorce seem impossible to AlexeyAlexandrovitch was, that by consenting to a divorce he would becompletely ruining Anna. The saying of Darya Alexandrovna at Moscow,that in deciding on a divorce he was thinking of himself, and notconsidering that by this he would be ruining her irrevocably, had sunkinto his heart. And connecting this saying with his forgiveness of her,with his devotion to the children, he understood it now in his own way.To consent to a divorce, to give her her freedom, meant in his thoughtsto take from himself the last tie that bound him to life—the childrenwhom he loved; and to take from her the last prop that stayed her on thepath of right, to thrust her down to her ruin. If she were divorced, heknew she would join her life to Vronsky’s, and their tie would be anillegitimate and criminal one, since a wife, by the interpretation ofthe ecclesiastical law, could not marry while her husband was living."She will join him, and in a year or two he will throw her over, or shewill form a new tie," thought Alexey Alexandrovitch. "And I, by agreeingto an unlawful divorce, shall be to blame for her ruin." He had thoughtit all over hundreds of times, and was convinced that a divorce was notat all simple, as Stepan Arkadyevitch had said, but was utterlyimpossible. He did not believe a single word Stepan Arkadyevitch said tohim; to every word he had a thousand objections to make, but he listenedto him, feeling that his words were the expression of that mighty brutalforce which controlled his life and to which he would have to submit.
"The only question is on what terms you agree to give her a divorce. Shedoes not want anything, does not dare ask you for anything, she leavesit all to your generosity."
"My God, my God! what for?" thought Alexey Alexandrovitch, rememberingthe details of divorce proceedings in which the husband took the blameon himself, and with just the same gesture with which Vronsky had donethe same, he hid his face for shame in his hands.
"You are distressed, I understand that. But if you think it over..."
"Whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the otheralso; and if any man take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also,"thought Alexey Alexandrovitch.
"Yes, yes!" he cried in a shrill voice. "I will take the disgrace onmyself, I will give up even my son, but ... but wouldn’t it be better tolet it alone? Still you may do as you like..."
And turning away so that his brother-in-law could not see him, he satdown on a chair at the window. There was bitterness, there was shame inhis heart, but with bitterness and shame he felt joy and emotion at theheight of his own meekness.
Stepan Arkadyevitch was touched. He was silent for a space.
"Alexey Alexandrovitch, believe me, she appreciates your generosity," hesaid. "But it seems it was the will of God," he added, and as he said itfelt how foolish a remark it was, and with difficulty repressed a smileat his own foolishness.
Alexey Alexandrovitch would have made some reply, but tears stopped him.
"This is an unhappy fatality, and one must accept it as such. I acceptthe calamity as an accomplished fact, and am doing my best to help bothher and you," said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
When he went out of his brother-in-law’s room he was touched, but thatdid not prevent him from being glad he had successfully brought thematter to a conclusion, for he felt certain Alexey Alexandrovitch wouldnot go back on his words. To this satisfaction was added the fact thatan idea had just struck him for a riddle turning on his successfulachievement, that when the affair was over he would ask his wife andmost intimate friends. He put this riddle into two or three differentways. "But I’ll work it out better than that," he said to himself with asmile.


Chapter 23

Vronsky’s wound had been a dangerous one, though it did not touch theheart, and for several days he had lain between life and death. Thefirst time he was able to speak, Varya, his brother’s wife, was alone inthe room.
"Varya," he said, looking sternly at her, "I shot myself by accident.And please never speak of it, and tell everyone so. Or else it’s tooridiculous."
Without answering his words, Varya bent over him, and with a delightedsmile gazed into his face. His eyes were clear, not feverish; but theirexpression was stern.
"Thank God!" she said. "You’re not in pain?"
"A little here." He pointed to his breast.
"Then let me change your bandages."
In silence, stiffening his broad jaws, he looked at her while shebandaged him up. When she had finished he said:
"I’m not delirious. Please manage that there may be no talk of my havingshot myself on purpose."
"No one does say so. Only I hope you won’t shoot yourself by accidentany more," she said, with a questioning smile.
"Of course I won’t, but it would have been better..."
And he smiled gloomily.
In spite of these words and this smile, which so frightened Varya, whenthe inflammation was over and he began to recover, he felt that he wascompletely free from one part of his misery. By his action he had, as itwere, washed away the shame and humiliation he had felt before. He couldnow think calmly of Alexey Alexandrovitch. He recognized all hismagnanimity, but he did not now feel himself humiliated by it. Besides,he got back again into the beaten track of his life. He saw thepossibility of looking men in the face again without shame, and he couldlive in accordance with his own habits. One thing he could not pluck outof his heart, though he never ceased struggling with it, was the regret,amounting to despair, that he had lost her forever. That now, havingexpiated his sin against the husband, he was bound to renounce her, andnever in future to stand between her with her repentance and herhusband, he had firmly decided in his heart; but he could not tear outof his heart his regret at the loss of her love, he could not erase fromhis memory those moments of happiness that he had so little prized atthe time, and that haunted him in all their charm.
Serpuhovskoy had planned his appointment at Tashkend, and Vronsky agreedto the proposition without the slightest hesitation. But the nearer thetime of departure came, the bitterer was the sacrifice he was making towhat he thought his duty.
His wound had healed, and he was driving about making preparations forhis departure for Tashkend.
"To see her once and then to bury myself, to die," he thought, and as hewas paying farewell visits, he uttered this thought to Betsy. Chargedwith this commission, Betsy had gone to Anna, and brought him back anegative reply.
"So much the better," thought Vronsky, when he received the news. "Itwas a weakness, which would have shattered what strength I have left."
Next day Betsy herself came to him in the morning, and announced thatshe had heard through Oblonsky as a positive fact that AlexeyAlexandrovitch had agreed to a divorce, and that therefore Vronsky couldsee Anna.
Without even troubling himself to see Betsy out of his flat, forgettingall his resolutions, without asking when he could see her, where herhusband was, Vronsky drove straight to the Karenins’. He ran up thestairs seeing no one and nothing, and with a rapid step, almost breakinginto a run, he went into her room. And without considering, withoutnoticing whether there was anyone in the room or not, he flung his armsround her, and began to cover her face, her hands, her neck with kisses.
Anna had been preparing herself for this meeting, had thought what shewould say to him, but she did not succeed in saying anything of it; hispassion mastered her. She tried to calm him, to calm herself, but it wastoo late. His feeling infected her. Her lips trembled so that for a longwhile she could say nothing.
"Yes, you have conquered me, and I am yours," she said at last, pressinghis hands to her bosom.
"So it had to be," he said. "So long as we live, it must be so. I knowit now."
"That’s true," she said, getting whiter and whiter, and embracing hishead. "Still there is something terrible in it after all that hashappened."
"It will all pass, it will all pass; we shall be so happy. Our love, ifit could be stronger, will be strengthened by there being somethingterrible in it," he said, lifting his head and parting his strong teethin a smile.
And she could not but respond with a smile—not to his words, but to thelove in his eyes. She took his hand and stroked her chilled cheeks andcropped head with it.
"I don’t know you with this short hair. You’ve grown so pretty. A boy.But how pale you are!"
"Yes, I’m very weak," she said, smiling. And her lips began tremblingagain.
"We’ll go to Italy; you will get strong," he said.
"Can it be possible we could be like husband and wife, alone, yourfamily with you?" she said, looking close into his eyes.
"It only seems strange to me that it can ever have been otherwise."
"Stiva says that _he_ has agreed to everything, but I can’t accept _his_generosity," she said, looking dreamily past Vronsky’s face. "I don’twant a divorce; it’s all the same to me now. Only I don’t know what hewill decide about Seryozha."
He could not conceive how at this moment of their meeting she couldremember and think of her son, of divorce. What did it all matter?
"Don’t speak of that, don’t think of it," he said, turning her hand inhis, and trying to draw her attention to him; but still she did not lookat him.
"Oh, why didn’t I die! it would have been better," she said, and silenttears flowed down both her cheeks; but she tried to smile, so as not towound him.
To decline the flattering and dangerous appointment at Tashkend wouldhave been, Vronsky had till then considered, disgraceful and impossible.But now, without an instant’s consideration, he declined it, andobserving dissatisfaction in the most exalted quarters at this step, heimmediately retired from the army.
A month later Alexey Alexandrovitch was left alone with his son in hishouse at Petersburg, while Anna and Vronsky had gone abroad, not havingobtained a divorce, but having absolutely declined all idea of one.



PART FIVE


Chapter 1

Princess Shtcherbatskaya considered that it was out of the question forthe wedding to take place before Lent, just five weeks off, since nothalf the trousseau could possibly be ready by that time. But she couldnot but agree with Levin that to fix it for after Lent would be puttingit off too late, as an old aunt of Prince Shtcherbatsky’s was seriouslyill and might die, and then the mourning would delay the wedding stilllonger. And therefore, deciding to divide the trousseau into two parts—alarger and smaller trousseau—the princess consented to have the weddingbefore Lent. She determined that she would get the smaller part of thetrousseau all ready now, and the larger part should be made later, andshe was much vexed with Levin because he was incapable of giving her aserious answer to the question whether he agreed to this arrangement ornot. The arrangement was the more suitable as, immediately after thewedding, the young people were to go to the country, where the moreimportant part of the trousseau would not be wanted.
Levin still continued in the same delirious condition in which it seemedto him that he and his happiness constituted the chief and sole aim ofall existence, and that he need not now think or care about anything,that everything was being done and would be done for him by others. Hehad not even plans and aims for the future, he left its arrangement toothers, knowing that everything would be delightful. His brother SergeyIvanovitch, Stepan Arkadyevitch, and the princess guided him in doingwhat he had to do. All he did was to agree entirely with everythingsuggested to him. His brother raised money for him, the princess advisedhim to leave Moscow after the wedding. Stepan Arkadyevitch advised himto go abroad. He agreed to everything. "Do what you choose, if it amusesyou. I’m happy, and my happiness can be no greater and no less foranything you do," he thought. When he told Kitty of StepanArkadyevitch’s advice that they should go abroad, he was much surprisedthat she did not agree to this, and had some definite requirements ofher own in regard to their future. She knew Levin had work he loved inthe country. She did not, as he saw, understand this work, she did noteven care to understand it. But that did not prevent her from regardingit as a matter of great importance. And then she knew their home wouldbe in the country, and she wanted to go, not abroad where she was notgoing to live, but to the place where their home would be. Thisdefinitely expressed purpose astonished Levin. But since he did not careeither way, he immediately asked Stepan Arkadyevitch, as though it werehis duty, to go down to the country and to arrange everything there tothe best of his ability with the taste of which he had so much.
"But I say," Stepan Arkadyevitch said to him one day after he had comeback from the country, where he had got everything ready for the youngpeople’s arrival, "have you a certificate of having been at confession?"
"No. But what of it?"
"You can’t be married without it."
"_Aïe, aïe, aïe!_" cried Levin. "Why, I believe it’s nine years sinceI’ve taken the sacrament! I never thought of it."
"You’re a pretty fellow!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch laughing, "and youcall me a Nihilist! But this won’t do, you know. You must take thesacrament."
"When? There are four days left now."
Stepan Arkadyevitch arranged this also, and Levin had to go toconfession. To Levin, as to any unbeliever who respects the beliefs ofothers, it was exceedingly disagreeable to be present at and take partin church ceremonies. At this moment, in his present softened state offeeling, sensitive to everything, this inevitable act of hypocrisy wasnot merely painful to Levin, it seemed to him utterly impossible. Now,in the heyday of his highest glory, his fullest flower, he would have tobe a liar or a scoffer. He felt incapable of being either. But though herepeatedly plied Stepan Arkadyevitch with questions as to thepossibility of obtaining a certificate without actually communicating,Stepan Arkadyevitch maintained that it was out of the question.
"Besides, what is it to you—two days? And he’s an awfully nice cleverold fellow. He’ll pull the tooth out for you so gently, you won’t noticeit."
Standing at the first litany, Levin attempted to revive in himself hisyouthful recollections of the intense religious emotion he had passedthrough between the ages of sixteen and seventeen.
But he was at once convinced that it was utterly impossible to him. Heattempted to look at it all as an empty custom, having no sort ofmeaning, like the custom of paying calls. But he felt that he could notdo that either. Levin found himself, like the majority of hiscontemporaries, in the vaguest position in regard to religion. Believehe could not, and at the same time he had no firm conviction that it wasall wrong. And consequently, not being able to believe in thesignificance of what he was doing nor to regard it with indifference asan empty formality, during the whole period of preparing for thesacrament he was conscious of a feeling of discomfort and shame at doingwhat he did not himself understand, and what, as an inner voice toldhim, was therefore false and wrong.
During the service he would first listen to the prayers, trying toattach some meaning to them not discordant with his own views; thenfeeling that he could not understand and must condemn them, he tried notto listen to them, but to attend to the thoughts, observations, andmemories which floated through his brain with extreme vividness duringthis idle time of standing in church.
He had stood through the litany, the evening service and the midnightservice, and the next day he got up earlier than usual, and withouthaving tea went at eight o’clock in the morning to the church for themorning service and the confession.
There was no one in the church but a beggar soldier, two old women, andthe church officials. A young deacon, whose long back showed in twodistinct halves through his thin undercassock, met him, and at oncegoing to a little table at the wall read the exhortation. During thereading, especially at the frequent and rapid repetition of the samewords, "Lord, have mercy on us!" which resounded with an echo, Levinfelt that thought was shut and sealed up, and that it must not betouched or stirred now or confusion would be the result; and so standingbehind the deacon he went on thinking of his own affairs, neitherlistening nor examining what was said. "It’s wonderful what expressionthere is in her hand," he thought, remembering how they had been sittingthe day before at a corner table. They had nothing to talk about, as wasalmost always the case at this time, and laying her hand on the tableshe kept opening and shutting it, and laughed herself as she watched heraction. He remembered how he had kissed it and then had examined thelines on the pink palm. "Have mercy on us again!" thought Levin,crossing himself, bowing, and looking at the supple spring of thedeacon’s back bowing before him. "She took my hand then and examined thelines ‘You’ve got a splendid hand,’ she said." And he looked at his ownhand and the short hand of the deacon. "Yes, now it will soon be over,"he thought. "No, it seems to be beginning again," he thought, listeningto the prayers. "No, it’s just ending: there he is bowing down to theground. That’s always at the end."
The deacon’s hand in a plush cuff accepted a three-rouble noteunobtrusively, and the deacon said he would put it down in the register,and his new boots creaking jauntily over the flagstones of the emptychurch, he went to the altar. A moment later he peeped out thence andbeckoned to Levin. Thought, till then locked up, began to stir inLevin’s head, but he made haste to drive it away. "It will come rightsomehow," he thought, and went towards the altar-rails. He went up thesteps, and turning to the right saw the priest. The priest, a little oldman with a scanty grizzled beard and weary, good-natured eyes, wasstanding at the altar-rails, turning over the pages of a missal. With aslight bow to Levin he began immediately reading prayers in the officialvoice. When he had finished them he bowed down to the ground and turned,facing Levin.
"Christ is present here unseen, receiving your confession," he said,pointing to the crucifix. "Do you believe in all the doctrines of theHoly Apostolic Church?" the priest went on, turning his eyes away fromLevin’s face and folding his hands under his stole.
"I have doubted, I doubt everything," said Levin in a voice that jarredon himself, and he ceased speaking.
The priest waited a few seconds to see if he would not say more, andclosing his eyes he said quickly, with a broad, Vladimirsky accent:
"Doubt is natural to the weakness of mankind, but we must pray that Godin His mercy will strengthen us. What are your special sins?" he added,without the slightest interval, as though anxious not to waste time.
"My chief sin is doubt. I have doubts of everything, and for the mostpart I am in doubt."
"Doubt is natural to the weakness of mankind," the priest repeated thesame words. "What do you doubt about principally?"
"I doubt of everything. I sometimes even have doubts of the existence ofGod," Levin could not help saying, and he was horrified at theimpropriety of what he was saying. But Levin’s words did not, it seemed,make much impression on the priest.
"What sort of doubt can there be of the existence of God?" he saidhurriedly, with a just perceptible smile.
Levin did not speak.
"What doubt can you have of the Creator when you behold His creation?"the priest went on in the rapid customary jargon. "Who has decked theheavenly firmament with its lights? Who has clothed the earth in itsbeauty? How explain it without the Creator?" he said, lookinginquiringly at Levin.
Levin felt that it would be improper to enter upon a metaphysicaldiscussion with the priest, and so he said in reply merely what was adirect answer to the question.
"I don’t know," he said.
"You don’t know! Then how can you doubt that God created all?" thepriest said, with good-humored perplexity.
"I don’t understand it at all," said Levin, blushing, and feeling thathis words were stupid, and that they could not be anything but stupid insuch a position.
"Pray to God and beseech Him. Even the holy fathers had doubts, andprayed to God to strengthen their faith. The devil has great power, andwe must resist him. Pray to God, beseech Him. Pray to God," he repeatedhurriedly.
The priest paused for some time, as though meditating.
"You’re about, I hear, to marry the daughter of my parishioner and sonin the spirit, Prince Shtcherbatsky?" he resumed, with a smile. "Anexcellent young lady."
"Yes," answered Levin, blushing for the priest. "What does he want toask me about this at confession for?" he thought.
And, as though answering his thought, the priest said to him:
"You are about to enter into holy matrimony, and God may bless you withoffspring. Well, what sort of bringing-up can you give your babes if youdo not overcome the temptation of the devil, enticing you toinfidelity?" he said, with gentle reproachfulness. "If you love yourchild as a good father, you will not desire only wealth, luxury, honorfor your infant; you will be anxious for his salvation, his spiritualenlightenment with the light of truth. Eh? What answer will you make himwhen the innocent babe asks you: ‘Papa! who made all that enchants me inthis world—the earth, the waters, the sun, the flowers, the grass?’ Canyou say to him: ‘I don’t know’? You cannot but know, since the Lord Godin His infinite mercy has revealed it to us. Or your child will ask you:‘What awaits me in the life beyond the tomb?’ What will you say to himwhen you know nothing? How will you answer him? Will you leave him tothe allurements of the world and the devil? That’s not right," he said,and he stopped, putting his head on one side and looking at Levin withhis kindly, gentle eyes.
Levin made no answer this time, not because he did not want to enterupon a discussion with the priest, but because, so far, no one had everasked him such questions, and when his babes did ask him thosequestions, it would be time enough to think about answering them.
"You are entering upon a time of life," pursued the priest, "when youmust choose your path and keep to it. Pray to God that He may in Hismercy aid you and have mercy on you!" he concluded. "Our Lord and God,Jesus Christ, in the abundance and riches of His lovingkindness,forgives this child..." and, finishing the prayer of absolution, thepriest blessed him and dismissed him.
On getting home that day, Levin had a delightful sense of relief at theawkward position being over and having been got through without hishaving to tell a lie. Apart from this, there remained a vague memorythat what the kind, nice old fellow had said had not been at all sostupid as he had fancied at first, and that there was something in itthat must be cleared up.
"Of course, not now," thought Levin, "but some day later on." Levin feltmore than ever now that there was something not clear and not clean inhis soul, and that, in regard to religion, he was in the same positionwhich he perceived so clearly and disliked in others, and for which heblamed his friend Sviazhsky.
Levin spent that evening with his betrothed at Dolly’s, and was in veryhigh spirits. To explain to Stepan Arkadyevitch the state of excitementin which he found himself, he said that he was happy like a dog beingtrained to jump through a hoop, who, having at last caught the idea, anddone what was required of him, whines and wags its tail, and jumps up tothe table and the windows in its delight.


Chapter 2

On the day of the wedding, according to the Russian custom (the princessand Darya Alexandrovna insisted on strictly keeping all the customs),Levin did not see his betrothed, and dined at his hotel with threebachelor friends, casually brought together at his rooms. These wereSergey Ivanovitch, Katavasov, a university friend, now professor ofnatural science, whom Levin had met in the street and insisted on takinghome with him, and Tchirikov, his best man, a Moscow conciliation-boardjudge, Levin’s companion in his bear-hunts. The dinner was a very merryone: Sergey Ivanovitch was in his happiest mood, and was much amused byKatavasov’s originality. Katavasov, feeling his originality wasappreciated and understood, made the most of it. Tchirikov always gave alively and good-humored support to conversation of any sort.
"See, now," said Katavasov, drawling his words from a habit acquired inthe lecture-room, "what a capable fellow was our friend KonstantinDmitrievitch. I’m not speaking of present company, for he’s absent. Atthe time he left the university he was fond of science, took an interestin humanity; now one-half of his abilities is devoted to deceivinghimself, and the other to justifying the deceit."
"A more determined enemy of matrimony than you I never saw," said SergeyIvanovitch.
"Oh, no, I’m not an enemy of matrimony. I’m in favor of division oflabor. People who can do nothing else ought to rear people while therest work for their happiness and enlightenment. That’s how I look atit. To muddle up two trades is the error of the amateur; I’m not one oftheir number."
"How happy I shall be when I hear that you’re in love!" said Levin."Please invite me to the wedding."
"I’m in love now."
"Yes, with a cuttlefish! You know," Levin turned to his brother, "MihailSemyonovitch is writing a work on the digestive organs of the..."
"Now, make a muddle of it! It doesn’t matter what about. And the factis, I certainly do love cuttlefish."
"But that’s no hindrance to your loving your wife."
"The cuttlefish is no hindrance. The wife is the hindrance."
"Why so?"
"Oh, you’ll see! You care about farming, hunting,—well, you’d betterlook out!"
"Arhip was here today; he said there were a lot of elks in Prudno, andtwo bears," said Tchirikov.
"Well, you must go and get them without me."
"Ah, that’s the truth," said Sergey Ivanovitch. "And you may saygood-bye to bear-hunting for the future—your wife won’t allow it!"
Levin smiled. The picture of his wife not letting him go was so pleasantthat he was ready to renounce the delights of looking upon bearsforever.
"Still, it’s a pity they should get those two bears without you. Do youremember last time at Hapilovo? That was a delightful hunt!" saidTchirikov.
Levin had not the heart to disillusion him of the notion that therecould be something delightful apart from her, and so said nothing.
"There’s some sense in this custom of saying good-bye to bachelor life,"said Sergey Ivanovitch. "However happy you may be, you must regret yourfreedom."
"And confess there is a feeling that you want to jump out of the window,like Gogol’s bridegroom?"
"Of course there is, but it isn’t confessed," said Katavasov, and hebroke into loud laughter.
"Oh, well, the window’s open. Let’s start off this instant to Tver!There’s a big she-bear; one can go right up to the lair. Seriously,let’s go by the five o’clock! And here let them do what they like," saidTchirikov, smiling.
"Well, now, on my honor," said Levin, smiling, "I can’t find in my heartthat feeling of regret for my freedom."
"Yes, there’s such a chaos in your heart just now that you can’t findanything there," said Katavasov. "Wait a bit, when you set it to rightsa little, you’ll find it!"
"No; if so, I should have felt a little, apart from my feeling" (hecould not say love before them) "and happiness, a certain regret atlosing my freedom.... On the contrary, I am glad at the very loss of myfreedom."
"Awful! It’s a hopeless case!" said Katavasov. "Well, let’s drink to hisrecovery, or wish that a hundredth part of his dreams may berealized—and that would be happiness such as never has been seen onearth!"
Soon after dinner the guests went away to be in time to be dressed forthe wedding.
When he was left alone, and recalled the conversation of these bachelorfriends, Levin asked himself: had he in his heart that regret for hisfreedom of which they had spoken? He smiled at the question. "Freedom!What is freedom for? Happiness is only in loving and wishing her wishes,thinking her thoughts, that is to say, not freedom at all—that’shappiness!"
"But do I know her ideas, her wishes, her feelings?" some voice suddenlywhispered to him. The smile died away from his face, and he grewthoughtful. And suddenly a strange feeling came upon him. There cameover him a dread and doubt—doubt of everything.
"What if she does not love me? What if she’s marrying me simply to bemarried? What if she doesn’t see herself what she’s doing?" he askedhimself. "She may come to her senses, and only when she is being marriedrealize that she does not and cannot love me." And strange, most evilthoughts of her began to come to him. He was jealous of Vronsky, as hehad been a year ago, as though the evening he had seen her with Vronskyhad been yesterday. He suspected she had not told him everything.
He jumped up quickly. "No, this can’t go on!" he said to himself indespair. "I’ll go to her; I’ll ask her; I’ll say for the last time: weare free, and hadn’t we better stay so? Anything’s better than endlessmisery, disgrace, unfaithfulness!" With despair in his heart and bitteranger against all men, against himself, against her, he went out of thehotel and drove to her house.
He found her in one of the back rooms. She was sitting on a chest andmaking some arrangements with her maid, sorting over heaps of dresses ofdifferent colors, spread on the backs of chairs and on the floor.
"Ah!" she cried, seeing him, and beaming with delight. "Kostya!Konstantin Dmitrievitch!" (These latter days she used these names almostalternately.) "I didn’t expect you! I’m going through my wardrobe to seewhat’s for whom..."
"Oh! that’s very nice!" he said gloomily, looking at the maid.
"You can go, Dunyasha, I’ll call you presently," said Kitty. "Kostya,what’s the matter?" she asked, definitely adopting this familiar name assoon as the maid had gone out. She noticed his strange face, agitatedand gloomy, and a panic came over her.
"Kitty! I’m in torture. I can’t suffer alone," he said with despair inhis voice, standing before her and looking imploringly into her eyes. Hesaw already from her loving, truthful face, that nothing could come ofwhat he had meant to say, but yet he wanted her to reassure him herself."I’ve come to say that there’s still time. This can all be stopped andset right."
"What? I don’t understand. What is the matter?"
"What I have said a thousand times over, and can’t help thinking ...that I’m not worthy of you. You couldn’t consent to marry me. Think alittle. You’ve made a mistake. Think it over thoroughly. You can’t loveme.... If ... better say so," he said, not looking at her. "I shall bewretched. Let people say what they like; anything’s better thanmisery.... Far better now while there’s still time...."
"I don’t understand," she answered, panic-stricken; "you mean you wantto give it up ... don’t want it?"
"Yes, if you don’t love me."
"You’re out of your mind!" she cried, turning crimson with vexation. Buthis face was so piteous, that she restrained her vexation, and flingingsome clothes off an arm-chair, she sat down beside him. "What are youthinking? tell me all."
"I am thinking you can’t love me. What can you love me for?"
"My God! what can I do?..." she said, and burst into tears.
"Oh! what have I done?" he cried, and kneeling before her, he fell tokissing her hands.
When the princess came into the room five minutes later, she found themcompletely reconciled. Kitty had not simply assured him that she lovedhim, but had gone so far—in answer to his question, what she loved himfor—as to explain what for. She told him that she loved him because sheunderstood him completely, because she knew what he would like, andbecause everything he liked was good. And this seemed to him perfectlyclear. When the princess came to them, they were sitting side by side onthe chest, sorting the dresses and disputing over Kitty’s wanting togive Dunyasha the brown dress she had been wearing when Levin proposedto her, while he insisted that that dress must never be given away, butDunyasha must have the blue one.
"How is it you don’t see? She’s a brunette, and it won’t suit her....I’ve worked it all out."
Hearing why he had come, the princess was half humorously, halfseriously angry with him, and sent him home to dress and not to hinderKitty’s hair-dressing, as Charles the hair-dresser was just coming.
"As it is, she’s been eating nothing lately and is losing her looks, andthen you must come and upset her with your nonsense," she said to him."Get along with you, my dear!"
Levin, guilty and shamefaced, but pacified, went back to his hotel. Hisbrother, Darya Alexandrovna, and Stepan Arkadyevitch, all in full dress,were waiting for him to bless him with the holy picture. There was notime to lose. Darya Alexandrovna had to drive home again to fetch hercurled and pomaded son, who was to carry the holy pictures after thebride. Then a carriage had to be sent for the best man, and another thatwould take Sergey Ivanovitch away would have to be sent back....Altogether there were a great many most complicated matters to beconsidered and arranged. One thing was unmistakable, that there must beno delay, as it was already half-past six.
Nothing special happened at the ceremony of benediction with the holypicture. Stepan Arkadyevitch stood in a comically solemn pose beside hiswife, took the holy picture, and telling Levin to bow down to theground, he blessed him with his kindly, ironical smile, and kissed himthree times; Darya Alexandrovna did the same, and immediately was in ahurry to get off, and again plunged into the intricate question of thedestinations of the various carriages.
"Come, I’ll tell you how we’ll manage: you drive in our carriage tofetch him, and Sergey Ivanovitch, if he’ll be so good, will drive thereand then send his carriage."
"Of course; I shall be delighted."
"We’ll come on directly with him. Are your things sent off?" said StepanArkadyevitch.
"Yes," answered Levin, and he told Kouzma to put out his clothes for himto dress.


Chapter 3

A crowd of people, principally women, was thronging round the churchlighted up for the wedding. Those who had not succeeded in getting intothe main entrance were crowding about the windows, pushing, wrangling,and peeping through the gratings.
More than twenty carriages had already been drawn up in ranks along thestreet by the police. A police officer, regardless of the frost, stoodat the entrance, gorgeous in his uniform. More carriages werecontinually driving up, and ladies wearing flowers and carrying theirtrains, and men taking off their helmets or black hats kept walking intothe church. Inside the church both lusters were already lighted, and allthe candles before the holy pictures. The gilt on the red ground of theholy picture-stand, and the gilt relief on the pictures, and the silverof the lusters and candlesticks, and the stones of the floor, and therugs, and the banners above in the choir, and the steps of the altar,and the old blackened books, and the cassocks and surplices—all wereflooded with light. On the right side of the warm church, in the crowdof frock coats and white ties, uniforms and broadcloth, velvet, satin,hair and flowers, bare shoulders and arms and long gloves, there wasdiscreet but lively conversation that echoed strangely in the highcupola. Every time there was heard the creak of the opened door theconversation in the crowd died away, and everybody looked roundexpecting to see the bride and bridegroom come in. But the door hadopened more than ten times, and each time it was either a belated guestor guests, who joined the circle of the invited on the right, or aspectator, who had eluded or softened the police officer, and went tojoin the crowd of outsiders on the left. Both the guests and the outsidepublic had by now passed through all the phases of anticipation.
At first they imagined that the bride and bridegroom would arriveimmediately, and attached no importance at all to their being late. Thenthey began to look more and more often towards the door, and to talk ofwhether anything could have happened. Then the long delay began to bepositively discomforting, and relations and guests tried to look as ifthey were not thinking of the bridegroom but were engrossed inconversation.
The head deacon, as though to remind them of the value of his time,coughed impatiently, making the window-panes quiver in their frames. Inthe choir the bored choristers could be heard trying their voices andblowing their noses. The priest was continually sending first the beadleand then the deacon to find out whether the bridegroom had not come,more and more often he went himself, in a lilac vestment and anembroidered sash, to the side door, expecting to see the bridegroom. Atlast one of the ladies, glancing at her watch, said, "It really isstrange, though!" and all the guests became uneasy and began loudlyexpressing their wonder and dissatisfaction. One of the bridegroom’sbest men went to find out what had happened. Kitty meanwhile had longago been quite ready, and in her white dress and long veil and wreath oforange blossoms she was standing in the drawing-room of theShtcherbatskys’ house with her sister, Madame Lvova, who was herbridal-mother. She was looking out of the window, and had been for overhalf an hour anxiously expecting to hear from the best man that herbridegroom was at the church.
Levin meanwhile, in his trousers, but without his coat and waistcoat,was walking to and fro in his room at the hotel, continually putting hishead out of the door and looking up and down the corridor. But in thecorridor there was no sign of the person he was looking for and he cameback in despair, and frantically waving his hands addressed StepanArkadyevitch, who was smoking serenely.
"Was ever a man in such a fearful fool’s position?" he said.
"Yes, it is stupid," Stepan Arkadyevitch assented, smiling soothingly."But don’t worry, it’ll be brought directly."
"No, what is to be done!" said Levin, with smothered fury. "And thesefools of open waistcoats! Out of the question!" he said, looking at thecrumpled front of his shirt. "And what if the things have been taken onto the railway station!" he roared in desperation.
"Then you must put on mine."
"I ought to have done so long ago, if at all."
"It’s not nice to look ridiculous.... Wait a bit! it will _come round_."
The point was that when Levin asked for his evening suit, Kouzma, hisold servant, had brought him the coat, waistcoat, and everything thatwas wanted.
"But the shirt!" cried Levin.
"You’ve got a shirt on," Kouzma answered, with a placid smile.
Kouzma had not thought of leaving out a clean shirt, and on receivinginstructions to pack up everything and send it round to theShtcherbatskys’ house, from which the young people were to set out thesame evening, he had done so, packing everything but the dress suit. Theshirt worn since the morning was crumpled and out of the question withthe fashionable open waistcoat. It was a long way to send to theShtcherbatskys’. They sent out to buy a shirt. The servant came back;everything was shut up—it was Sunday. They sent to Stepan Arkadyevitch’sand brought a shirt—it was impossibly wide and short. They sent finallyto the Shtcherbatskys’ to unpack the things. The bridegroom was expectedat the church while he was pacing up and down his room like a wild beastin a cage, peeping out into the corridor, and with horror and despairrecalling what absurd things he had said to Kitty and what she might bethinking now.
At last the guilty Kouzma flew panting into the room with the shirt.
"Only just in time. They were just lifting it into the van," saidKouzma.
Three minutes later Levin ran full speed into the corridor, not lookingat his watch for fear of aggravating his sufferings.
"You won’t help matters like this," said Stepan Arkadyevitch with asmile, hurrying with more deliberation after him. "It will come round,it will come round ... I tell you."


Chapter 4

"They’ve come!" "Here he is!" "Which one?" "Rather young, eh?" "Why, mydear soul, she looks more dead than alive!" were the comments in thecrowd, when Levin, meeting his bride in the entrance, walked with herinto the church.
Stepan Arkadyevitch told his wife the cause of the delay, and the guestswere whispering it with smiles to one another. Levin saw nothing and noone; he did not take his eyes off his bride.
Everyone said she had lost her looks dreadfully of late, and was notnearly so pretty on her wedding day as usual; but Levin did not thinkso. He looked at her hair done up high, with the long white veil andwhite flowers and the high, stand-up, scalloped collar, that in such amaidenly fashion hid her long neck at the sides and only showed it infront, her strikingly slender figure, and it seemed to him that shelooked better than ever—not because these flowers, this veil, this gownfrom Paris added anything to her beauty; but because, in spite of theelaborate sumptuousness of her attire, the expression of her sweet face,of her eyes, of her lips was still her own characteristic expression ofguileless truthfulness.
"I was beginning to think you meant to run away," she said, and smiledto him.
"It’s so stupid, what happened to me, I’m ashamed to speak of it!" hesaid, reddening, and he was obliged to turn to Sergey Ivanovitch, whocame up to him.
"This is a pretty story of yours about the shirt!" said SergeyIvanovitch, shaking his head and smiling.
"Yes, yes!" answered Levin, without an idea of what they were talkingabout.
"Now, Kostya, you have to decide," said Stepan Arkadyevitch with an airof mock dismay, "a weighty question. You are at this moment just in thehumor to appreciate all its gravity. They ask me, are they to light thecandles that have been lighted before or candles that have never beenlighted? It’s a matter of ten roubles," he added, relaxing his lips intoa smile. "I have decided, but I was afraid you might not agree."
Levin saw it was a joke, but he could not smile.
"Well, how’s it to be then?—unlighted or lighted candles? that’s thequestion."
"Yes, yes, unlighted."
"Oh, I’m very glad. The question’s decided!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch,smiling. "How silly men are, though, in this position," he said toTchirikov, when Levin, after looking absently at him, had moved back tohis bride.
"Kitty, mind you’re the first to step on the carpet," said CountessNordston, coming up. "You’re a nice person!" she said to Levin.
"Aren’t you frightened, eh?" said Marya Dmitrievna, an old aunt.
"Are you cold? You’re pale. Stop a minute, stoop down," said Kitty’ssister, Madame Lvova, and with her plump, handsome arms she smilinglyset straight the flowers on her head.
Dolly came up, tried to say something, but could not speak, cried, andthen laughed unnaturally.
Kitty looked at all of them with the same absent eyes as Levin.
Meanwhile the officiating clergy had got into their vestments, and thepriest and deacon came out to the lectern, which stood in the forepartof the church. The priest turned to Levin saying something. Levin didnot hear what the priest said.
"Take the bride’s hand and lead her up," the best man said to Levin.
It was a long while before Levin could make out what was expected ofhim. For a long time they tried to set him right and made him beginagain—because he kept taking Kitty by the wrong arm or with the wrongarm—till he understood at last that what he had to do was, withoutchanging his position, to take her right hand in his right hand. When atlast he had taken the bride’s hand in the correct way, the priest walkeda few paces in front of them and stopped at the lectern. The crowd offriends and relations moved after them, with a buzz of talk and a rustleof skirts. Someone stooped down and pulled out the bride’s train. Thechurch became so still that the drops of wax could be heard falling fromthe candles.
The little old priest in his ecclesiastical cap, with his longsilvery-gray locks of hair parted behind his ears, was fumbling withsomething at the lectern, putting out his little old hands from underthe heavy silver vestment with the gold cross on the back of it.
Stepan Arkadyevitch approached him cautiously, whispered something, andmaking a sign to Levin, walked back again.
The priest lighted two candles, wreathed with flowers, and holding themsideways so that the wax dropped slowly from them he turned, facing thebridal pair. The priest was the same old man that had confessed Levin.He looked with weary and melancholy eyes at the bride and bridegroom,sighed, and putting his right hand out from his vestment, blessed thebridegroom with it, and also with a shade of solicitous tenderness laidthe crossed fingers on the bowed head of Kitty. Then he gave them thecandles, and taking the censer, moved slowly away from them.
"Can it be true?" thought Levin, and he looked round at his bride.Looking down at her he saw her face in profile, and from the scarcelyperceptible quiver of her lips and eyelashes he knew she was aware ofhis eyes upon her. She did not look round, but the high scallopedcollar, that reached her little pink ear, trembled faintly. He saw thata sigh was held back in her throat, and the little hand in the longglove shook as it held the candle.
All the fuss of the shirt, of being late, all the talk of friends andrelations, their annoyance, his ludicrous position—all suddenly passedaway and he was filled with joy and dread.
The handsome, stately head-deacon wearing a silver robe and his curlylocks standing out at each side of his head, stepped smartly forward,and lifting his stole on two fingers, stood opposite the priest.
"Blessed be the name of the Lord," the solemn syllables rang out slowlyone after another, setting the air quivering with waves of sound.
"Blessed is the name of our God, from the beginning, is now, and evershall be," the little old priest answered in a submissive, piping voice,still fingering something at the lectern. And the full chorus of theunseen choir rose up, filling the whole church, from the windows to thevaulted roof, with broad waves of melody. It grew stronger, rested foran instant, and slowly died away.
They prayed, as they always do, for peace from on high and forsalvation, for the Holy Synod, and for the Tsar; they prayed, too, forthe servants of God, Konstantin and Ekaterina, now plighting theirtroth.
"Vouchsafe to them love made perfect, peace and help, O Lord, we beseechThee," the whole church seemed to breathe with the voice of the headdeacon.
Levin heard the words, and they impressed him. "How did they guess thatit is help, just help that one wants?" he thought, recalling all hisfears and doubts of late. "What do I know? what can I do in this fearfulbusiness," he thought, "without help? Yes, it is help I want now."
When the deacon had finished the prayer for the Imperial family, thepriest turned to the bridal pair with a book: "Eternal God, that joinesttogether in love them that were separate," he read in a gentle, pipingvoice: "who hast ordained the union of holy wedlock that cannot be setasunder, Thou who didst bless Isaac and Rebecca and their descendants,according to Thy Holy Covenant; bless Thy servants, Konstantin andEkaterina, leading them in the path of all good works. For gracious andmerciful art Thou, our Lord, and glory be to Thee, the Father, the Son,and the Holy Ghost, now and ever shall be."
"Amen!" the unseen choir sent rolling again upon the air.
"‘Joinest together in love them that were separate.’ What deep meaningin those words, and how they correspond with what one feels at thismoment," thought Levin. "Is she feeling the same as I?"
And looking round, he met her eyes, and from their expression heconcluded that she was understanding it just as he was. But this was amistake; she almost completely missed the meaning of the words of theservice; she had not heard them, in fact. She could not listen to themand take them in, so strong was the one feeling that filled her breastand grew stronger and stronger. That feeling was joy at the completionof the process that for the last month and a half had been going on inher soul, and had during those six weeks been a joy and a torture toher. On the day when in the drawing room of the house in Arbaty Streetshe had gone up to him in her brown dress, and given herself to himwithout a word—on that day, at that hour, there took place in her hearta complete severance from all her old life, and a quite different, new,utterly strange life had begun for her, while the old life was actuallygoing on as before. Those six weeks had for her been a time of theutmost bliss and the utmost misery. All her life, all her desires andhopes were concentrated on this one man, still uncomprehended by her, towhom she was bound by a feeling of alternate attraction and repulsion,even less comprehended than the man himself, and all the while she wasgoing on living in the outward conditions of her old life. Living theold life, she was horrified at herself, at her utter insurmountablecallousness to all her own past, to things, to habits, to the people shehad loved, who loved her—to her mother, who was wounded by herindifference, to her kind, tender father, till then dearer than all theworld. At one moment she was horrified at this indifference, at anothershe rejoiced at what had brought her to this indifference. She could notframe a thought, not a wish apart from life with this man; but this newlife was not yet, and she could not even picture it clearly to herself.There was only anticipation, the dread and joy of the new and theunknown. And now behold—anticipation and uncertainty and remorse at theabandonment of the old life—all was ending, and the new was beginning.This new life could not but have terrors for her inexperience; but,terrible or not, the change had been wrought six weeks before in hersoul, and this was merely the final sanction of what had long beencompleted in her heart.
Turning again to the lectern, the priest with some difficulty tookKitty’s little ring, and asking Levin for his hand, put it on the firstjoint of his finger. "The servant of God, Konstantin, plights his trothto the servant of God, Ekaterina." And putting his big ring on Kitty’stouchingly weak, pink little finger, the priest said the same thing.
And the bridal pair tried several times to understand what they had todo, and each time made some mistake and were corrected by the priest ina whisper. At last, having duly performed the ceremony, having signedthe rings with the cross, the priest handed Kitty the big ring, andLevin the little one. Again they were puzzled, and passed the rings fromhand to hand, still without doing what was expected.
Dolly, Tchirikov, and Stepan Arkadyevitch stepped forward to set themright. There was an interval of hesitation, whispering, and smiles; butthe expression of solemn emotion on the faces of the betrothed pair didnot change: on the contrary, in their perplexity over their hands theylooked more grave and deeply moved than before, and the smile with whichStepan Arkadyevitch whispered to them that now they would each put ontheir own ring died away on his lips. He had a feeling that any smilewould jar on them.
"Thou who didst from the beginning create male and female," the priestread after the exchange of rings, "from Thee woman was given to man tobe a helpmeet to him, and for the procreation of children. O Lord, ourGod, who hast poured down the blessings of Thy Truth according to ThyHoly Covenant upon Thy chosen servants, our fathers, from generation togeneration, bless Thy servants Konstantin and Ekaterina, and make theirtroth fast in faith, and union of hearts, and truth, and love...."
Levin felt more and more that all his ideas of marriage, all his dreamsof how he would order his life, were mere childishness, and that it wassomething he had not understood hitherto, and now understood less thanever, though it was being performed upon him. The lump in his throatrose higher and higher, tears that would not be checked came into hiseyes.


Chapter 5

In the church there was all Moscow, all the friends and relations; andduring the ceremony of plighting troth, in the brilliantly lightedchurch, there was an incessant flow of discreetly subdued talk in thecircle of gaily dressed women and girls, and men in white ties,frockcoats, and uniforms. The talk was principally kept up by the men,while the women were absorbed in watching every detail of the ceremony,which always means so much to them.
In the little group nearest to the bride were her two sisters: Dolly,and the other one, the self-possessed beauty, Madame Lvova, who had justarrived from abroad.
"Why is it Marie’s in lilac, as bad as black, at a wedding?" said MadameKorsunskaya.
"With her complexion, it’s the one salvation," responded MadameTrubetskaya. "I wonder why they had the wedding in the evening? It’slike shop-people..."
"So much prettier. I was married in the evening too..." answered MadameKorsunskaya, and she sighed, remembering how charming she had been thatday, and how absurdly in love her husband was, and how different it allwas now.
"They say if anyone’s best man more than ten times, he’ll never bemarried. I wanted to be for the tenth time, but the post was taken,"said Count Siniavin to the pretty Princess Tcharskaya, who had designson him.
Princess Tcharskaya only answered with a smile. She looked at Kitty,thinking how and when she would stand with Count Siniavin in Kitty’splace, and how she would remind him then of his joke today.
Shtcherbatsky told the old maid of honor, Madame Nikolaeva, that hemeant to put the crown on Kitty’s chignon for luck.
"She ought not to have worn a chignon," answered Madame Nikolaeva, whohad long ago made up her mind that if the elderly widower she wasangling for married her, the wedding should be of the simplest. "I don’tlike such grandeur."
Sergey Ivanovitch was talking to Darya Dmitrievna, jestingly assuringher that the custom of going away after the wedding was becoming commonbecause newly married people always felt a little ashamed of themselves.
"Your brother may feel proud of himself. She’s a marvel of sweetness. Ibelieve you’re envious."
"Oh, I’ve got over that, Darya Dmitrievna," he answered, and amelancholy and serious expression suddenly came over his face.
Stepan Arkadyevitch was telling his sister-in-law his joke aboutdivorce.
"The wreath wants setting straight," she answered, not hearing him.
"What a pity she’s lost her looks so," Countess Nordston said to MadameLvova. "Still he’s not worth her little finger, is he?"
"Oh, I like him so—not because he’s my future _beau-frère_," answeredMadame Lvova. "And how well he’s behaving! It’s so difficult, too, tolook well in such a position, not to be ridiculous. And he’s notridiculous, and not affected; one can see he’s moved."
"You expected it, I suppose?"
"Almost. She always cared for him."
"Well, we shall see which of them will step on the rug first. I warnedKitty."
"It will make no difference," said Madame Lvova; "we’re all obedientwives; it’s in our family."
"Oh, I stepped on the rug before Vassily on purpose. And you, Dolly?"
Dolly stood beside them; she heard them, but she did not answer. She wasdeeply moved. The tears stood in her eyes, and she could not have spokenwithout crying. She was rejoicing over Kitty and Levin; going back inthought to her own wedding, she glanced at the radiant figure of StepanArkadyevitch, forgot all the present, and remembered only her owninnocent love. She recalled not herself only, but all her women-friendsand acquaintances. She thought of them on the one day of their triumph,when they had stood like Kitty under the wedding crown, with love andhope and dread in their hearts, renouncing the past, and steppingforward into the mysterious future. Among the brides that came back toher memory, she thought too of her darling Anna, of whose proposeddivorce she had just been hearing. And she had stood just as innocent inorange flowers and bridal veil. And now? "It’s terribly strange," shesaid to herself. It was not merely the sisters, the women-friends andfemale relations of the bride who were following every detail of theceremony. Women who were quite strangers, mere spectators, were watchingit excitedly, holding their breath, in fear of losing a single movementor expression of the bride and bridegroom, and angrily not answering,often not hearing, the remarks of the callous men, who kept makingjoking or irrelevant observations.
"Why has she been crying? Is she being married against her will?"
"Against her will to a fine fellow like that? A prince, isn’t he?"
"Is that her sister in the white satin? Just listen how the deacon boomsout, ‘And fearing her husband.’"
"Are the choristers from Tchudovo?"
"No, from the Synod."
"I asked the footman. He says he’s going to take her home to his countryplace at once. Awfully rich, they say. That’s why she’s being married tohim."
"No, they’re a well-matched pair."
"I say, Marya Vassilievna, you were making out those fly-away crinolineswere not being worn. Just look at her in the puce dress—an ambassador’swife they say she is—how her skirt bounces out from side to side!"
"What a pretty dear the bride is—like a lamb decked with flowers! Well,say what you will, we women feel for our sister."
Such were the comments in the crowd of gazing women who had succeeded inslipping in at the church doors.


Chapter 6

When the ceremony of plighting troth was over, the beadle spread beforethe lectern in the middle of the church a piece of pink silken stuff,the choir sang a complicated and elaborate psalm, in which the bass andtenor sang responses to one another, and the priest turning roundpointed the bridal pair to the pink silk rug. Though both had oftenheard a great deal about the saying that the one who steps first on therug will be the head of the house, neither Levin nor Kitty were capableof recollecting it, as they took the few steps towards it. They did nothear the loud remarks and disputes that followed, some maintaining hehad stepped on first, and others that both had stepped on together.
After the customary questions, whether they desired to enter uponmatrimony, and whether they were pledged to anyone else, and theiranswers, which sounded strange to themselves, a new ceremony began.Kitty listened to the words of the prayer, trying to make out theirmeaning, but she could not. The feeling of triumph and radiant happinessflooded her soul more and more as the ceremony went on, and deprived herof all power of attention.
They prayed: "Endow them with continence and fruitfulness, and vouchsafethat their hearts may rejoice looking upon their sons and daughters."They alluded to God’s creation of a wife from Adam’s rib "and for thiscause a man shall leave father and mother, and cleave unto his wife, andthey two shall be one flesh," and that "this is a great mystery"; theyprayed that God would make them fruitful and bless them, like Isaac andRebecca, Joseph, Moses and Zipporah, and that they might look upon theirchildren’s children. "That’s all splendid," thought Kitty, catching thewords, "all that’s just as it should be," and a smile of happiness,unconsciously reflected in everyone who looked at her, beamed on herradiant face.
"Put it on quite," voices were heard urging when the priest had put onthe wedding crowns and Shtcherbatsky, his hand shaking in itsthree-button glove, held the crown high above her head.
"Put it on!" she whispered, smiling.
Levin looked round at her, and was struck by the joyful radiance on herface, and unconsciously her feeling infected him. He too, like her feltglad and happy.
They enjoyed hearing the epistle read, and the roll of the head deacon’svoice at the last verse, awaited with such impatience by the outsidepublic. They enjoyed drinking out of the shallow cup of warm red wineand water, and they were still more pleased when the priest, flingingback his stole and taking both their hands in his, led them round thelectern to the accompaniment of bass voices chanting "Glory to God."
Shtcherbatsky and Tchirikov, supporting the crowns and stumbling overthe bride’s train, smiling too and seeming delighted at something, wereat one moment left behind, at the next treading on the bridal pair asthe priest came to a halt. The spark of joy kindled in Kitty seemed tohave infected everyone in the church. It seemed to Levin that the priestand the deacon too wanted to smile just as he did.
Taking the crowns off their heads the priest read the last prayer andcongratulated the young people. Levin looked at Kitty, and he had neverbefore seen her look as she did. She was charming with the new radianceof happiness in her face. Levin longed to say something to her, but hedid not know whether it was all over. The priest got him out of hisdifficulty. He smiled his kindly smile and said gently, "Kiss your wife,and you kiss your husband," and took the candles out of their hands.
Levin kissed her smiling lips with timid care, gave her his arm, andwith a new strange sense of closeness, walked out of the church. He didnot believe, he could not believe, that it was true. It was only whentheir wondering and timid eyes met that he believed in it, because hefelt that they were one.
After supper, the same night, the young people left for the country.


Chapter 7

Vronsky and Anna had been traveling for three months together in Europe.They had visited Venice, Rome, and Naples, and had just arrived at asmall Italian town where they meant to stay some time. A handsome headwaiter, with thick pomaded hair parted from the neck upwards, an eveningcoat, a broad white cambric shirt front, and a bunch of trinkets hangingabove his rounded stomach, stood with his hands in the full curve of hispockets, looking contemptuously from under his eyelids while he gavesome frigid reply to a gentleman who had stopped him. Catching the soundof footsteps coming from the other side of the entry towards thestaircase, the head waiter turned round, and seeing the Russian count,who had taken their best rooms, he took his hands out of his pocketsdeferentially, and with a bow informed him that a courier had been, andthat the business about the palazzo had been arranged. The steward wasprepared to sign the agreement.
"Ah! I’m glad to hear it," said Vronsky. "Is madame at home or not?"
"Madame has been out for a walk but has returned now," answered thewaiter.
Vronsky took off his soft, wide-brimmed hat and passed his handkerchiefover his heated brow and hair, which had grown half over his ears, andwas brushed back covering the bald patch on his head. And glancingcasually at the gentleman, who still stood there gazing intently at him,he would have gone on.
"This gentleman is a Russian, and was inquiring after you," said thehead waiter.
With mingled feelings of annoyance at never being able to get away fromacquaintances anywhere, and longing to find some sort of diversion fromthe monotony of his life, Vronsky looked once more at the gentleman, whohad retreated and stood still again, and at the same moment a light cameinto the eyes of both.
"Golenishtchev!"
"Vronsky!"
It really was Golenishtchev, a comrade of Vronsky’s in the Corps ofPages. In the corps Golenishtchev had belonged to the liberal party; heleft the corps without entering the army, and had never taken officeunder the government. Vronsky and he had gone completely different wayson leaving the corps, and had only met once since.
At that meeting Vronsky perceived that Golenishtchev had taken up a sortof lofty, intellectually liberal line, and was consequently disposed tolook down upon Vronsky’s interests and calling in life. Hence Vronskyhad met him with the chilling and haughty manner he so well knew how toassume, the meaning of which was: "You may like or dislike my way oflife, that’s a matter of the most perfect indifference to me; you willhave to treat me with respect if you want to know me." Golenishtchev hadbeen contemptuously indifferent to the tone taken by Vronsky. Thissecond meeting might have been expected, one would have supposed, toestrange them still more. But now they beamed and exclaimed with delighton recognizing one another. Vronsky would never have expected to be sopleased to see Golenishtchev, but probably he was not himself aware howbored he was. He forgot the disagreeable impression of their lastmeeting, and with a face of frank delight held out his hand to his oldcomrade. The same expression of delight replaced the look of uneasinesson Golenishtchev’s face.
"How glad I am to meet you!" said Vronsky, showing his strong whiteteeth in a friendly smile.
"I heard the name Vronsky, but I didn’t know which one. I’m very, veryglad!"
"Let’s go in. Come, tell me what you’re doing."
"I’ve been living here for two years. I’m working."
"Ah!" said Vronsky, with sympathy; "let’s go in." And with the habitcommon with Russians, instead of saying in Russian what he wanted tokeep from the servants, he began to speak in French.
"Do you know Madame Karenina? We are traveling together. I am going tosee her now," he said in French, carefully scrutinizing Golenishtchev’sface.
"Ah! I did not know" (though he did know), Golenishtchev answeredcarelessly. "Have you been here long?" he added.
"Four days," Vronsky answered, once more scrutinizing his friend’s faceintently.
"Yes, he’s a decent fellow, and will look at the thing properly,"Vronsky said to himself, catching the significance of Golenishtchev’sface and the change of subject. "I can introduce him to Anna, he looksat it properly."
During those three months that Vronsky had spent abroad with Anna, hehad always on meeting new people asked himself how the new person wouldlook at his relations with Anna, and for the most part, in men, he hadmet with the "proper" way of looking at it. But if he had been asked,and those who looked at it "properly" had been asked, exactly how theydid look at it, both he and they would have been greatly puzzled toanswer.
In reality, those who in Vronsky’s opinion had the "proper" view had nosort of view at all, but behaved in general as well-bred persons dobehave in regard to all the complex and insoluble problems with whichlife is encompassed on all sides; they behaved with propriety, avoidingallusions and unpleasant questions. They assumed an air of fullycomprehending the import and force of the situation, of accepting andeven approving of it, but of considering it superfluous and uncalled forto put all this into words.
Vronsky at once divined that Golenishtchev was of this class, andtherefore was doubly pleased to see him. And in fact, Golenishtchev’smanner to Madame Karenina, when he was taken to call on her, was allthat Vronsky could have desired. Obviously without the slightest efforthe steered clear of all subjects which might lead to embarrassment.
He had never met Anna before, and was struck by her beauty, and stillmore by the frankness with which she accepted her position. She blushedwhen Vronsky brought in Golenishtchev, and he was extremely charmed bythis childish blush overspreading her candid and handsome face. But whathe liked particularly was the way in which at once, as though on purposethat there might be no misunderstanding with an outsider, she calledVronsky simply Alexey, and said they were moving into a house they hadjust taken, what was here called a palazzo. Golenishtchev liked thisdirect and simple attitude to her own position. Looking at Anna’s mannerof simple-hearted, spirited gaiety, and knowing Alexey Alexandrovitchand Vronsky, Golenishtchev fancied that he understood her perfectly. Hefancied that he understood what she was utterly unable to understand:how it was that, having made her husband wretched, having abandoned himand her son and lost her good name, she yet felt full of spirits,gaiety, and happiness.
"It’s in the guide-book," said Golenishtchev, referring to the palazzoVronsky had taken. "There’s a first-rate Tintoretto there. One of hislatest period."
"I tell you what: it’s a lovely day, let’s go and have another look atit," said Vronsky, addressing Anna.
"I shall be very glad to; I’ll go and put on my hat. Would you say it’shot?" she said, stopping short in the doorway and looking inquiringly atVronsky. And again a vivid flush overspread her face.
Vronsky saw from her eyes that she did not know on what terms he caredto be with Golenishtchev, and so was afraid of not behaving as he wouldwish.
He looked a long, tender look at her.
"No, not very," he said.
And it seemed to her that she understood everything, most of all, thathe was pleased with her; and smiling to him, she walked with her rapidstep out at the door.
The friends glanced at one another, and a look of hesitation came intoboth faces, as though Golenishtchev, unmistakably admiring her, wouldhave liked to say something about her, and could not find the rightthing to say, while Vronsky desired and dreaded his doing so.
"Well then," Vronsky began to start a conversation of some sort; "soyou’re settled here? You’re still at the same work, then?" he went on,recalling that he had been told Golenishtchev was writing something.
"Yes, I’m writing the second part of the _Two Elements_," saidGolenishtchev, coloring with pleasure at the question—"that is, to beexact, I am not writing it yet; I am preparing, collecting materials. Itwill be of far wider scope, and will touch on almost all questions. Wein Russia refuse to see that we are the heirs of Byzantium," and helaunched into a long and heated explanation of his views.
Vronsky at the first moment felt embarrassed at not even knowing of thefirst part of the _Two Elements_, of which the author spoke as somethingwell known. But as Golenishtchev began to lay down his opinions andVronsky was able to follow them even without knowing the _Two Elements_,he listened to him with some interest, for Golenishtchev spoke well. ButVronsky was startled and annoyed by the nervous irascibility with whichGolenishtchev talked of the subject that engrossed him. As he went ontalking, his eyes glittered more and more angrily; he was more and morehurried in his replies to imaginary opponents, and his face grew moreand more excited and worried. Remembering Golenishtchev, a thin, lively,good-natured and well-bred boy, always at the head of the class, Vronskycould not make out the reason of his irritability, and he did not likeit. What he particularly disliked was that Golenishtchev, a manbelonging to a good set, should put himself on a level with somescribbling fellows, with whom he was irritated and angry. Was it worthit? Vronsky disliked it, yet he felt that Golenishtchev was unhappy, andwas sorry for him. Unhappiness, almost mental derangement, was visibleon his mobile, rather handsome face, while without even noticing Anna’scoming in, he went on hurriedly and hotly expressing his views.
When Anna came in in her hat and cape, and her lovely hand rapidlyswinging her parasol, and stood beside him, it was with a feeling ofrelief that Vronsky broke away from the plaintive eyes of Golenishtchevwhich fastened persistently upon him, and with a fresh rush of lovelooked at his charming companion, full of life and happiness.Golenishtchev recovered himself with an effort, and at first wasdejected and gloomy, but Anna, disposed to feel friendly with everyoneas she was at that time, soon revived his spirits by her direct andlively manner. After trying various subjects of conversation, she gothim upon painting, of which he talked very well, and she listened to himattentively. They walked to the house they had taken, and looked overit.
"I am very glad of one thing," said Anna to Golenishtchev when they wereon their way back, "Alexey will have a capital _atelier_. You mustcertainly take that room," she said to Vronsky in Russian, using theaffectionately familiar form as though she saw that Golenishtchev wouldbecome intimate with them in their isolation, and that there was no needof reserve before him.
"Do you paint?" said Golenishtchev, turning round quickly to Vronsky.
"Yes, I used to study long ago, and now I have begun to do a little,"said Vronsky, reddening.
"He has great talent," said Anna with a delighted smile. "I’m no judge,of course. But good judges have said the same."


Chapter 8

Anna, in that first period of her emancipation and rapid return tohealth, felt herself unpardonably happy and full of the joy of life. Thethought of her husband’s unhappiness did not poison her happiness. Onone side that memory was too awful to be thought of. On the other sideher husband’s unhappiness had given her too much happiness to beregretted. The memory of all that had happened after her illness: herreconciliation with her husband, its breakdown, the news of Vronsky’swound, his visit, the preparations for divorce, the departure from herhusband’s house, the parting from her son—all that seemed to her like adelirious dream, from which she had waked up alone with Vronsky abroad.The thought of the harm caused to her husband aroused in her a feelinglike repulsion, and akin to what a drowning man might feel who hasshaken off another man clinging to him. That man did drown. It was anevil action, of course, but it was the sole means of escape, and betternot to brood over these fearful facts.
One consolatory reflection upon her conduct had occurred to her at thefirst moment of the final rupture, and when now she recalled all thepast, she remembered that one reflection. "I have inevitably made thatman wretched," she thought; "but I don’t want to profit by his misery. Itoo am suffering, and shall suffer; I am losing what I prized aboveeverything—I am losing my good name and my son. I have done wrong, andso I don’t want happiness, I don’t want a divorce, and shall suffer frommy shame and the separation from my child." But, however sincerely Annahad meant to suffer, she was not suffering. Shame there was not. Withthe tact of which both had such a large share, they had succeeded inavoiding Russian ladies abroad, and so had never placed themselves in afalse position, and everywhere they had met people who pretended thatthey perfectly understood their position, far better indeed than theydid themselves. Separation from the son she loved—even that did notcause her anguish in these early days. The baby girl—_his_ child—was sosweet, and had so won Anna’s heart, since she was all that was left her,that Anna rarely thought of her son.
The desire for life, waxing stronger with recovered health, was sointense, and the conditions of life were so new and pleasant, that Annafelt unpardonably happy. The more she got to know Vronsky, the more sheloved him. She loved him for himself, and for his love for her. Hercomplete ownership of him was a continual joy to her. His presence wasalways sweet to her. All the traits of his character, which she learnedto know better and better, were unutterably dear to her. His appearance,changed by his civilian dress, was as fascinating to her as though shewere some young girl in love. In everything he said, thought, and did,she saw something particularly noble and elevated. Her adoration of himalarmed her indeed; she sought and could not find in him anything notfine. She dared not show him her sense of her own insignificance besidehim. It seemed to her that, knowing this, he might sooner cease to loveher; and she dreaded nothing now so much as losing his love, though shehad no grounds for fearing it. But she could not help being grateful tohim for his attitude to her, and showing that she appreciated it. He,who had in her opinion such a marked aptitude for a political career, inwhich he would have been certain to play a leading part—he hadsacrificed his ambition for her sake, and never betrayed the slightestregret. He was more lovingly respectful to her than ever, and theconstant care that she should not feel the awkwardness of her positionnever deserted him for a single instant. He, so manly a man, neveropposed her, had indeed, with her, no will of his own, and was anxious,it seemed, for nothing but to anticipate her wishes. And she could notbut appreciate this, even though the very intensity of his solicitudefor her, the atmosphere of care with which he surrounded her, sometimesweighed upon her.
Vronsky, meanwhile, in spite of the complete realization of what he hadso long desired, was not perfectly happy. He soon felt that therealization of his desires gave him no more than a grain of sand out ofthe mountain of happiness he had expected. It showed him the mistake menmake in picturing to themselves happiness as the realization of theirdesires. For a time after joining his life to hers, and putting oncivilian dress, he had felt all the delight of freedom in general ofwhich he had known nothing before, and of freedom in his love,—and hewas content, but not for long. He was soon aware that there wasspringing up in his heart a desire for desires—_ennui_. Withoutconscious intention he began to clutch at every passing caprice, takingit for a desire and an object. Sixteen hours of the day must be occupiedin some way, since they were living abroad in complete freedom, outsidethe conditions of social life which filled up time in Petersburg. As forthe amusements of bachelor existence, which had provided Vronsky withentertainment on previous tours abroad, they could not be thought of,since the sole attempt of the sort had led to a sudden attack ofdepression in Anna, quite out of proportion with the cause—a late supperwith bachelor friends. Relations with the society of the place—foreignand Russian—were equally out of the question owing to the irregularityof their position. The inspection of objects of interest, apart from thefact that everything had been seen already, had not for Vronsky, aRussian and a sensible man, the immense significance Englishmen are ableto attach to that pursuit.
And just as the hungry stomach eagerly accepts every object it can get,hoping to find nourishment in it, Vronsky quite unconsciously clutchedfirst at politics, then at new books, and then at pictures.
As he had from a child a taste for painting, and as, not knowing what tospend his money on, he had begun collecting engravings, he came to astop at painting, began to take interest in it, and concentrated upon itthe unoccupied mass of desires which demanded satisfaction.
He had a ready appreciation of art, and probably, with a taste forimitating art, he supposed himself to have the real thing essential foran artist, and after hesitating for some time which style of painting toselect—religious, historical, realistic, or genre painting—he set towork to paint. He appreciated all kinds, and could have felt inspired byany one of them; but he had no conception of the possibility of knowingnothing at all of any school of painting, and of being inspired directlyby what is within the soul, without caring whether what is painted willbelong to any recognized school. Since he knew nothing of this, and drewhis inspiration, not directly from life, but indirectly from lifeembodied in art, his inspiration came very quickly and easily, and asquickly and easily came his success in painting something very similarto the sort of painting he was trying to imitate.
More than any other style he liked the French—graceful and effective—andin that style he began to paint Anna’s portrait in Italian costume, andthe portrait seemed to him, and to everyone who saw it, extremelysuccessful.


Chapter 9

The old neglected palazzo, with its lofty carved ceilings and frescoeson the walls, with its floors of mosaic, with its heavy yellow stuffcurtains on the windows, with its vases on pedestals, and its openfireplaces, its carved doors and gloomy reception rooms, hung withpictures—this palazzo did much, by its very appearance after they hadmoved into it, to confirm in Vronsky the agreeable illusion that he wasnot so much a Russian country gentleman, a retired army officer, as anenlightened amateur and patron of the arts, himself a modest artist whohad renounced the world, his connections, and his ambition for the sakeof the woman he loved.
The pose chosen by Vronsky with their removal into the palazzo wascompletely successful, and having, through Golenishtchev, madeacquaintance with a few interesting people, for a time he was satisfied.He painted studies from nature under the guidance of an Italianprofessor of painting, and studied mediaeval Italian life. MediaevalItalian life so fascinated Vronsky that he even wore a hat and flung acloak over his shoulder in the mediaeval style, which, indeed, wasextremely becoming to him.
"Here we live, and know nothing of what’s going on," Vronsky said toGolenishtchev as he came to see him one morning. "Have you seenMihailov’s picture?" he said, handing him a Russian gazette he hadreceived that morning, and pointing to an article on a Russian artist,living in the very same town, and just finishing a picture which hadlong been talked about, and had been bought beforehand. The articlereproached the government and the academy for letting so remarkable anartist be left without encouragement and support.
"I’ve seen it," answered Golenishtchev. "Of course, he’s not withouttalent, but it’s all in a wrong direction. It’s all theIvanov-Strauss-Renan attitude to Christ and to religious painting."
"What is the subject of the picture?" asked Anna.
"Christ before Pilate. Christ is represented as a Jew with all therealism of the new school."
And the question of the subject of the picture having brought him to oneof his favorite theories, Golenishtchev launched forth into adisquisition on it.
"I can’t understand how they can fall into such a gross mistake. Christalways has His definite embodiment in the art of the great masters. Andtherefore, if they want to depict, not God, but a revolutionist or asage, let them take from history a Socrates, a Franklin, a CharlotteCorday, but not Christ. They take the very figure which cannot be takenfor their art, and then..."
"And is it true that this Mihailov is in such poverty?" asked Vronsky,thinking that, as a Russian Maecenas, it was his duty to assist theartist regardless of whether the picture were good or bad.
"I should say not. He’s a remarkable portrait-painter. Have you everseen his portrait of Madame Vassiltchikova? But I believe he doesn’tcare about painting any more portraits, and so very likely he is inwant. I maintain that..."
"Couldn’t we ask him to paint a portrait of Anna Arkadyevna?" saidVronsky.
"Why mine?" said Anna. "After yours I don’t want another portrait.Better have one of Annie" (so she called her baby girl). "Here she is,"she added, looking out of the window at the handsome Italian nurse, whowas carrying the child out into the garden, and immediately glancingunnoticed at Vronsky. The handsome nurse, from whom Vronsky was paintinga head for his picture, was the one hidden grief in Anna’s life. Hepainted with her as his model, admired her beauty and mediaevalism, andAnna dared not confess to herself that she was afraid of becomingjealous of this nurse, and was for that reason particularly gracious andcondescending both to her and her little son. Vronsky, too, glanced outof the window and into Anna’s eyes, and, turning at once toGolenishtchev, he said:
"Do you know this Mihailov?"
"I have met him. But he’s a queer fish, and quite without breeding. Youknow, one of those uncouth new people one’s so often coming acrossnowadays, one of those free-thinkers you know, who are reared _d’emblée_in theories of atheism, scepticism, and materialism. In former days,"said Golenishtchev, not observing, or not willing to observe, that bothAnna and Vronsky wanted to speak, "in former days the free-thinker was aman who had been brought up in ideas of religion, law, and morality, andonly through conflict and struggle came to free-thought; but now therehas sprung up a new type of born free-thinkers who grow up without evenhaving heard of principles of morality or of religion, of the existenceof authorities, who grow up directly in ideas of negation in everything,that is to say, savages. Well, he’s of that class. He’s the son, itappears, of some Moscow butler, and has never had any sort ofbringing-up. When he got into the academy and made his reputation hetried, as he’s no fool, to educate himself. And he turned to what seemedto him the very source of culture—the magazines. In old times, you see,a man who wanted to educate himself—a Frenchman, for instance—would haveset to work to study all the classics and theologians and tragedians andhistoriaris and philosophers, and, you know, all the intellectual workthat came in his way. But in our day he goes straight for the literatureof negation, very quickly assimilates all the extracts of the science ofnegation, and he’s ready. And that’s not all—twenty years ago he wouldhave found in that literature traces of conflict with authorities, withthe creeds of the ages; he would have perceived from this conflict thatthere was something else; but now he comes at once upon a literature inwhich the old creeds do not even furnish matter for discussion, but itis stated baldly that there is nothing else—evolution, naturalselection, struggle for existence—and that’s all. In my article I’ve..."
"I tell you what," said Anna, who had for a long while been exchangingwary glances with Vronsky, and knew that he was not in the leastinterested in the education of this artist, but was simply absorbed bythe idea of assisting him, and ordering a portrait of him; "I tell youwhat," she said, resolutely interrupting Golenishtchev, who was stilltalking away, "let’s go and see him!"
Golenishtchev recovered his self-possession and readily agreed. But asthe artist lived in a remote suburb, it was decided to take thecarriage.
An hour later Anna, with Golenishtchev by her side and Vronsky on thefront seat of the carriage, facing them, drove up to a new ugly house inthe remote suburb. On learning from the porter’s wife, who came out tothem, that Mihailov saw visitors at his studio, but that at that momenthe was in his lodging only a couple of steps off, they sent her to himwith their cards, asking permission to see his picture.


Chapter 10

The artist Mihailov was, as always, at work when the cards of CountVronsky and Golenishtchev were brought to him. In the morning he hadbeen working in his studio at his big picture. On getting home he flewinto a rage with his wife for not having managed to put off thelandlady, who had been asking for money.
"I’ve said it to you twenty times, don’t enter into details. You’re foolenough at all times, and when you start explaining things in Italianyou’re a fool three times as foolish," he said after a long dispute.
"Don’t let it run so long; it’s not my fault. If I had the money..."
"Leave me in peace, for God’s sake!" Mihailov shrieked, with tears inhis voice, and, stopping his ears, he went off into his working room,the other side of a partition wall, and closed the door after him."Idiotic woman!" he said to himself, sat down to the table, and, openinga portfolio, he set to work at once with peculiar fervor at a sketch hehad begun.
Never did he work with such fervor and success as when things went illwith him, and especially when he quarreled with his wife. "Oh! damn themall!" he thought as he went on working. He was making a sketch for thefigure of a man in a violent rage. A sketch had been made before, but hewas dissatisfied with it. "No, that one was better ... where is it?" Hewent back to his wife, and scowling, and not looking at her, asked hiseldest little girl, where was that piece of paper he had given them? Thepaper with the discarded sketch on it was found, but it was dirty, andspotted with candle-grease. Still, he took the sketch, laid it on histable, and, moving a little away, screwing up his eyes, he fell togazing at it. All at once he smiled and gesticulated gleefully.
"That’s it! that’s it!" he said, and, at once picking up the pencil, hebegan rapidly drawing. The spot of tallow had given the man a new pose.
He had sketched this new pose, when all at once he recalled the face ofa shopkeeper of whom he had bought cigars, a vigorous face with aprominent chin, and he sketched this very face, this chin on to thefigure of the man. He laughed aloud with delight. The figure from alifeless imagined thing had become living, and such that it could neverbe changed. That figure lived, and was clearly and unmistakably defined.The sketch might be corrected in accordance with the requirements of thefigure, the legs, indeed, could and must be put differently, and theposition of the left hand must be quite altered; the hair too might bethrown back. But in making these corrections he was not altering thefigure but simply getting rid of what concealed the figure. He was, asit were, stripping off the wrappings which hindered it from beingdistinctly seen. Each new feature only brought out the whole figure inall its force and vigor, as it had suddenly come to him from the spot oftallow. He was carefully finishing the figure when the cards werebrought him.
"Coming, coming!"
He went in to his wife.
"Come, Sasha, don’t be cross!" he said, smiling timidly andaffectionately at her. "You were to blame. I was to blame. I’ll make itall right." And having made peace with his wife he put on an olive-greenovercoat with a velvet collar and a hat, and went towards his studio.The successful figure he had already forgotten. Now he was delighted andexcited at the visit of these people of consequence, Russians, who hadcome in their carriage.
Of his picture, the one that stood now on his easel, he had at thebottom of his heart one conviction—that no one had ever painted apicture like it. He did not believe that his picture was better than allthe pictures of Raphael, but he knew that what he tried to convey inthat picture, no one ever had conveyed. This he knew positively, and hadknown a long while, ever since he had begun to paint it. But otherpeople’s criticisms, whatever they might be, had yet immense consequencein his eyes, and they agitated him to the depths of his soul. Anyremark, the most insignificant, that showed that the critic saw even thetiniest part of what he saw in the picture, agitated him to the depthsof his soul. He always attributed to his critics a more profoundcomprehension than he had himself, and always expected from themsomething he did not himself see in the picture. And often in theircriticisms he fancied that he had found this.
He walked rapidly to the door of his studio, and in spite of hisexcitement he was struck by the soft light on Anna’s figure as she stoodin the shade of the entrance listening to Golenishtchev, who was eagerlytelling her something, while she evidently wanted to look round at theartist. He was himself unconscious how, as he approached them, he seizedon this impression and absorbed it, as he had the chin of the shopkeeperwho had sold him the cigars, and put it away somewhere to be brought outwhen he wanted it. The visitors, not agreeably impressed beforehand byGolenishtchev’s account of the artist, were still less so by hispersonal appearance. Thick-set and of middle height, with nimblemovements, with his brown hat, olive-green coat and narrowtrousers—though wide trousers had been a long while in fashion,—most ofall, with the ordinariness of his broad face, and the combinedexpression of timidity and anxiety to keep up his dignity, Mihailov madean unpleasant impression.
"Please step in," he said, trying to look indifferent, and going intothe passage he took a key out of his pocket and opened the door.


Chapter 11

On entering the studio, Mihailov once more scanned his visitors andnoted down in his imagination Vronsky’s expression too, and especiallyhis jaws. Although his artistic sense was unceasingly at work collectingmaterials, although he felt a continually increasing excitement as themoment of criticizing his work drew nearer, he rapidly and subtlyformed, from imperceptible signs, a mental image of these three persons.
That fellow (Golenishtchev) was a Russian living here. Mihailov did notremember his surname nor where he had met him, nor what he had said tohim. He only remembered his face as he remembered all the faces he hadever seen; but he remembered, too, that it was one of the faces laid byin his memory in the immense class of the falsely consequential and poorin expression. The abundant hair and very open forehead gave anappearance of consequence to the face, which had only one expression—apetty, childish, peevish expression, concentrated just above the bridgeof the narrow nose. Vronsky and Madame Karenina must be, Mihailovsupposed, distinguished and wealthy Russians, knowing nothing about art,like all those wealthy Russians, but posing as amateurs andconnoisseurs. "Most likely they’ve already looked at all the antiques,and now they’re making the round of the studios of the new people, theGerman humbug, and the cracked Pre-Raphaelite English fellow, and haveonly come to me to make the point of view complete," he thought. He waswell acquainted with the way dilettanti have (the cleverer they were theworse he found them) of looking at the works of contemporary artistswith the sole object of being in a position to say that art is a thingof the past, and that the more one sees of the new men the more one seeshow inimitable the works of the great old masters have remained. Heexpected all this; he saw it all in their faces, he saw it in thecareless indifference with which they talked among themselves, stared atthe lay figures and busts, and walked about in leisurely fashion,waiting for him to uncover his picture. But in spite of this, while hewas turning over his studies, pulling up the blinds and taking off thesheet, he was in intense excitement, especially as, in spite of hisconviction that all distinguished and wealthy Russians were certain tobe beasts and fools, he liked Vronsky, and still more Anna.
"Here, if you please," he said, moving on one side with his nimble gaitand pointing to his picture, "it’s the exhortation to Pilate. Matthew,chapter xxvii," he said, feeling his lips were beginning to tremble withemotion. He moved away and stood behind them.
For the few seconds during which the visitors were gazing at the picturein silence Mihailov too gazed at it with the indifferent eye of anoutsider. For those few seconds he was sure in anticipation that ahigher, juster criticism would be uttered by them, by those veryvisitors whom he had been so despising a moment before. He forgot all hehad thought about his picture before during the three years he had beenpainting it; he forgot all its qualities which had been absolutelycertain to him—he saw the picture with their indifferent, new, outsideeyes, and saw nothing good in it. He saw in the foreground Pilate’sirritated face and the serene face of Christ, and in the background thefigures of Pilate’s retinue and the face of John watching what washappening. Every face that, with such agony, such blunders andcorrections had grown up within him with its special character, everyface that had given him such torments and such raptures, and all thesefaces so many times transposed for the sake of the harmony of the whole,all the shades of color and tones that he had attained with suchlabor—all of this together seemed to him now, looking at it with theireyes, the merest vulgarity, something that had been done a thousandtimes over. The face dearest to him, the face of Christ, the center ofthe picture, which had given him such ecstasy as it unfolded itself tohim, was utterly lost to him when he glanced at the picture with theireyes. He saw a well-painted (no, not even that—he distinctly saw now amass of defects) repetition of those endless Christs of Titian, Raphael,Rubens, and the same soldiers and Pilate. It was all common, poor, andstale, and positively badly painted—weak and unequal. They would bejustified in repeating hypocritically civil speeches in the presence ofthe painter, and pitying him and laughing at him when they were aloneagain.
The silence (though it lasted no more than a minute) became toointolerable to him. To break it, and to show he was not agitated, hemade an effort and addressed Golenishtchev.
"I think I’ve had the pleasure of meeting you," he said, lookinguneasily first at Anna, then at Vronsky, in fear of losing any shade oftheir expression.
"To be sure! We met at Rossi’s, do you remember, at that _soirée_ whenthat Italian lady recited—the new Rachel?" Golenishtchev answeredeasily, removing his eyes without the slightest regret from the pictureand turning to the artist.
Noticing, however, that Mihailov was expecting a criticism of thepicture, he said:
"Your picture has got on a great deal since I saw it last time; and whatstrikes me particularly now, as it did then, is the figure of Pilate.One so knows the man: a good-natured, capital fellow, but an officialthrough and through, who does not know what it is he’s doing. But Ifancy..."
All Mihailov’s mobile face beamed at once; his eyes sparkled. He triedto say something, but he could not speak for excitement, and pretendedto be coughing. Low as was his opinion of Golenishtchev’s capacity forunderstanding art, trifling as was the true remark upon the fidelity ofthe expression of Pilate as an official, and offensive as might haveseemed the utterance of so unimportant an observation while nothing wassaid of more serious points, Mihailov was in an ecstasy of delight atthis observation. He had himself thought about Pilate’s figure just whatGolenishtchev said. The fact that this reflection was but one ofmillions of reflections, which as Mihailov knew for certain would betrue, did not diminish for him the significance of Golenishtchev’sremark. His heart warmed to Golenishtchev for this remark, and from astate of depression he suddenly passed to ecstasy. At once the whole ofhis picture lived before him in all the indescribable complexity ofeverything living. Mihailov again tried to say that that was how heunderstood Pilate, but his lips quivered intractably, and he could notpronounce the words. Vronsky and Anna too said something in that subduedvoice in which, partly to avoid hurting the artist’s feelings and partlyto avoid saying out loud something silly—so easily said when talking ofart—people usually speak at exhibitions of pictures. Mihailov fanciedthat the picture had made an impression on them too. He went up to them.
"How marvelous Christ’s expression is!" said Anna. Of all she saw sheliked that expression most of all, and she felt that it was the centerof the picture, and so praise of it would be pleasant to the artist."One can see that He is pitying Pilate."
This again was one of the million true reflections that could be foundin his picture and in the figure of Christ. She said that He was pityingPilate. In Christ’s expression there ought to be indeed an expression ofpity, since there is an expression of love, of heavenly peace, ofreadiness for death, and a sense of the vanity of words. Of course thereis the expression of an official in Pilate and of pity in Christ, seeingthat one is the incarnation of the fleshly and the other of thespiritual life. All this and much more flashed into Mihailov’s thoughts.
"Yes, and how that figure is done—what atmosphere! One can walk roundit," said Golenishtchev, unmistakably betraying by this remark that hedid not approve of the meaning and idea of the figure.
"Yes, there’s a wonderful mastery!" said Vronsky. "How those figures inthe background stand out! There you have technique," he said, addressingGolenishtchev, alluding to a conversation between them about Vronsky’sdespair of attaining this technique.
"Yes, yes, marvelous!" Golenishtchev and Anna assented. In spite of theexcited condition in which he was, the sentence about technique had senta pang to Mihailov’s heart, and looking angrily at Vronsky he suddenlyscowled. He had often heard this word technique, and was utterly unableto understand what was understood by it. He knew that by this term wasunderstood a mechanical facility for painting or drawing, entirely apartfrom its subject. He had noticed often that even in actual praisetechnique was opposed to essential quality, as though one could paintwell something that was bad. He knew that a great deal of attention andcare was necessary in taking off the coverings, to avoid injuring thecreation itself, and to take off all the coverings; but there was no artof painting—no technique of any sort—about it. If to a little child orto his cook were revealed what he saw, it or she would have been able topeel the wrappings off what was seen. And the most experienced andadroit painter could not by mere mechanical facility paint anything ifthe lines of the subject were not revealed to him first. Besides, he sawthat if it came to talking about technique, it was impossible to praisehim for it. In all he had painted and repainted he saw faults that hurthis eyes, coming from want of care in taking off the wrappings—faults hecould not correct now without spoiling the whole. And in almost all thefigures and faces he saw, too, remnants of the wrappings not perfectlyremoved that spoiled the picture.
"One thing might be said, if you will allow me to make the remark..."observed Golenishtchev.
"Oh, I shall be delighted, I beg you," said Mihailov with a forcedsmile.
"That is, that you make Him the man-god, and not the God-man. But I knowthat was what you meant to do."
"I cannot paint a Christ that is not in my heart," said Mihailovgloomily.
"Yes; but in that case, if you will allow me to say what I think....Your picture is so fine that my observation cannot detract from it, and,besides, it is only my personal opinion. With you it is different. Yourvery motive is different. But let us take Ivanov. I imagine that ifChrist is brought down to the level of an historical character, it wouldhave been better for Ivanov to select some other historical subject,fresh, untouched."
"But if this is the greatest subject presented to art?"
"If one looked one would find others. But the point is that art cannotsuffer doubt and discussion. And before the picture of Ivanov thequestion arises for the believer and the unbeliever alike, ‘Is it God,or is it not God?’ and the unity of the impression is destroyed."
"Why so? I think that for educated people," said Mihailov, "the questioncannot exist."
Golenishtchev did not agree with this, and confounded Mihailov by hissupport of his first idea of the unity of the impression being essentialto art.
Mihailov was greatly perturbed, but he could say nothing in defense ofhis own idea.


Chapter 12

Anna and Vronsky had long been exchanging glances, regretting theirfriend’s flow of cleverness. At last Vronsky, without waiting for theartist, walked away to another small picture.
"Oh, how exquisite! What a lovely thing! A gem! How exquisite!" theycried with one voice.
"What is it they’re so pleased with?" thought Mihailov. He hadpositively forgotten that picture he had painted three years ago. He hadforgotten all the agonies and the ecstasies he had lived through withthat picture when for several months it had been the one thoughthaunting him day and night. He had forgotten, as he always forgot, thepictures he had finished. He did not even like to look at it, and hadonly brought it out because he was expecting an Englishman who wanted tobuy it.
"Oh, that’s only an old study," he said.
"How fine!" said Golenishtchev, he too, with unmistakable sincerity,falling under the spell of the picture.
Two boys were angling in the shade of a willow-tree. The elder had justdropped in the hook, and was carefully pulling the float from behind abush, entirely absorbed in what he was doing. The other, a littleyounger, was lying in the grass leaning on his elbows, with his tangled,flaxen head in his hands, staring at the water with his dreamy blueeyes. What was he thinking of?
The enthusiasm over this picture stirred some of the old feeling for itin Mihailov, but he feared and disliked this waste of feeling for thingspast, and so, even though this praise was grateful to him, he tried todraw his visitors away to a third picture.
But Vronsky asked whether the picture was for sale. To Mihailov at thatmoment, excited by visitors, it was extremely distasteful to speak ofmoney matters.
"It is put up there to be sold," he answered, scowling gloomily.
When the visitors had gone, Mihailov sat down opposite the picture ofPilate and Christ, and in his mind went over what had been said, andwhat, though not said, had been implied by those visitors. And, strangeto say, what had had such weight with him, while they were there andwhile he mentally put himself at their point of view, suddenly lost allimportance for him. He began to look at his picture with all his ownfull artist vision, and was soon in that mood of conviction of theperfectibility, and so of the significance, of his picture—a convictionessential to the most intense fervor, excluding all other interests—inwhich alone he could work.
Christ’s foreshortened leg was not right, though. He took his paletteand began to work. As he corrected the leg he looked continually at thefigure of John in the background, which his visitors had not evennoticed, but which he knew was beyond perfection. When he had finishedthe leg he wanted to touch that figure, but he felt too much excited forit. He was equally unable to work when he was cold and when he was toomuch affected and saw everything too much. There was only one stage inthe transition from coldness to inspiration, at which work was possible.Today he was too much agitated. He would have covered the picture, buthe stopped, holding the cloth in his hand, and, smiling blissfully,gazed a long while at the figure of John. At last, as it wereregretfully tearing himself away, he dropped the cloth, and, exhaustedbut happy, went home.
Vronsky, Anna, and Golenishtchev, on their way home, were particularlylively and cheerful. They talked of Mihailov and his pictures. The word_talent_, by which they meant an inborn, almost physical, aptitude apartfrom brain and heart, and in which they tried to find an expression forall the artist had gained from life, recurred particularly often intheir talk, as though it were necessary for them to sum up what they hadno conception of, though they wanted to talk of it. They said that therewas no denying his talent, but that his talent could not develop forwant of education—the common defect of our Russian artists. But thepicture of the boys had imprinted itself on their memories, and theywere continually coming back to it. "What an exquisite thing! How he hassucceeded in it, and how simply! He doesn’t even comprehend how good itis. Yes, I mustn’t let it slip; I must buy it," said Vronsky.


Chapter 13

Mihailov sold Vronsky his picture, and agreed to paint a portrait ofAnna. On the day fixed he came and began the work.
From the fifth sitting the portrait impressed everyone, especiallyVronsky, not only by its resemblance, but by its characteristic beauty.It was strange how Mihailov could have discovered just hercharacteristic beauty. "One needs to know and love her as I have lovedher to discover the very sweetest expression of her soul," Vronskythought, though it was only from this portrait that he had himselflearned this sweetest expression of her soul. But the expression was sotrue that he, and others too, fancied they had long known it.
"I have been struggling on for ever so long without doing anything," hesaid of his own portrait of her, "and he just looked and painted it.That’s where technique comes in."
"That will come," was the consoling reassurance given him byGolenishtchev, in whose view Vronsky had both talent, and what was mostimportant, culture, giving him a wider outlook on art. Golenishtchev’sfaith in Vronsky’s talent was propped up by his own need of Vronsky’ssympathy and approval for his own articles and ideas, and he felt thatthe praise and support must be mutual.
In another man’s house, and especially in Vronsky’s palazzo, Mihailovwas quite a different man from what he was in his studio. He behavedwith hostile courtesy, as though he were afraid of coming closer topeople he did not respect. He called Vronsky "your excellency," andnotwithstanding Anna’s and Vronsky’s invitations, he would never stay todinner, nor come except for the sittings. Anna was even more friendly tohim than to other people, and was very grateful for her portrait.Vronsky was more than cordial with him, and was obviously interested toknow the artist’s opinion of his picture. Golenishtchev never let slipan opportunity of instilling sound ideas about art into Mihailov. ButMihailov remained equally chilly to all of them. Anna was aware from hiseyes that he liked looking at her, but he avoided conversation with her.Vronsky’s talk about his painting he met with stubborn silence, and hewas as stubbornly silent when he was shown Vronsky’s picture. He wasunmistakably bored by Golenishtchev’s conversation, and he did notattempt to oppose him.
Altogether Mihailov, with his reserved and disagreeable, as it were,hostile attitude, was quite disliked by them as they got to know himbetter; and they were glad when the sittings were over, and they wereleft with a magnificent portrait in their possession, and he gave upcoming. Golenishtchev was the first to give expression to an idea thathad occurred to all of them, which was that Mihailov was simply jealousof Vronsky.
"Not envious, let us say, since he has _talent_; but it annoys him thata wealthy man of the highest society, and a count, too (you know theyall detest a title), can, without any particular trouble, do as well, ifnot better, than he who has devoted all his life to it. And more thanall, it’s a question of culture, which he is without."
Vronsky defended Mihailov, but at the bottom of his heart he believedit, because in his view a man of a different, lower world would be sureto be envious.
Anna’s portrait—the same subject painted from nature both by him and byMihailov—ought to have shown Vronsky the difference between him andMihailov; but he did not see it. Only after Mihailov’s portrait waspainted he left off painting his portrait of Anna, deciding that it wasnow not needed. His picture of mediaeval life he went on with. And hehimself, and Golenishtchev, and still more Anna, thought it very good,because it was far more like the celebrated pictures they knew thanMihailov’s picture.
Mihailov meanwhile, although Anna’s portrait greatly fascinated him, waseven more glad than they were when the sittings were over, and he had nolonger to listen to Golenishtchev’s disquisitions upon art, and couldforget about Vronsky’s painting. He knew that Vronsky could not beprevented from amusing himself with painting; he knew that he and alldilettanti had a perfect right to paint what they liked, but it wasdistasteful to him. A man could not be prevented from making himself abig wax doll, and kissing it. But if the man were to come with the dolland sit before a man in love, and begin caressing his doll as the lovercaressed the woman he loved, it would be distasteful to the lover. Justsuch a distasteful sensation was what Mihailov felt at the sight ofVronsky’s painting: he felt it both ludicrous and irritating, bothpitiable and offensive.
Vronsky’s interest in painting and the Middle Ages did not last long. Hehad enough taste for painting to be unable to finish his picture. Thepicture came to a standstill. He was vaguely aware that its defects,inconspicuous at first, would be glaring if he were to go on with it.The same experience befell him as Golenishtchev, who felt that he hadnothing to say, and continually deceived himself with the theory thathis idea was not yet mature, that he was working it out and collectingmaterials. This exasperated and tortured Golenishtchev, but Vronsky wasincapable of deceiving and torturing himself, and even more incapable ofexasperation. With his characteristic decision, without explanation orapology, he simply ceased working at painting.
But without this occupation, the life of Vronsky and of Anna, whowondered at his loss of interest in it, struck them as intolerablytedious in an Italian town. The palazzo suddenly seemed so obtrusivelyold and dirty, the spots on the curtains, the cracks in the floors, thebroken plaster on the cornices became so disagreeably obvious, and theeverlasting sameness of Golenishtchev, and the Italian professor and theGerman traveler became so wearisome, that they had to make some change.They resolved to go to Russia, to the country. In Petersburg Vronskyintended to arrange a partition of the land with his brother, while Annameant to see her son. The summer they intended to spend on Vronsky’sgreat family estate.


Chapter 14

Levin had been married three months. He was happy, but not at all in theway he had expected to be. At every step he found his former dreamsdisappointed, and new, unexpected surprises of happiness. He was happy;but on entering upon family life he saw at every step that it wasutterly different from what he had imagined. At every step heexperienced what a man would experience who, after admiring the smooth,happy course of a little boat on a lake, should get himself into thatlittle boat. He saw that it was not all sitting still, floatingsmoothly; that one had to think too, not for an instant to forget whereone was floating; and that there was water under one, and that one mustrow; and that his unaccustomed hands would be sore; and that it was onlyto look at it that was easy; but that doing it, though very delightful,was very difficult.
As a bachelor, when he had watched other people’s married life, seen thepetty cares, the squabbles, the jealousy, he had only smiledcontemptuously in his heart. In his future married life there could be,he was convinced, nothing of that sort; even the external forms, indeed,he fancied, must be utterly unlike the life of others in everything. Andall of a sudden, instead of his life with his wife being made on anindividual pattern, it was, on the contrary, entirely made up of thepettiest details, which he had so despised before, but which now, by nowill of his own, had gained an extraordinary importance that it wasuseless to contend against. And Levin saw that the organization of allthese details was by no means so easy as he had fancied before. AlthoughLevin believed himself to have the most exact conceptions of domesticlife, unconsciously, like all men, he pictured domestic life as thehappiest enjoyment of love, with nothing to hinder and no petty cares todistract. He ought, as he conceived the position, to do his work, and tofind repose from it in the happiness of love. She ought to be beloved,and nothing more. But, like all men, he forgot that she too would wantwork. And he was surprised that she, his poetic, exquisite Kitty, could,not merely in the first weeks, but even in the first days of theirmarried life, think, remember, and busy herself about tablecloths, andfurniture, about mattresses for visitors, about a tray, about the cook,and the dinner, and so on. While they were still engaged, he had beenstruck by the definiteness with which she had declined the tour abroadand decided to go into the country, as though she knew of something shewanted, and could still think of something outside her love. This hadjarred upon him then, and now her trivial cares and anxieties jarredupon him several times. But he saw that this was essential for her. And,loving her as he did, though he did not understand the reason of them,and jeered at these domestic pursuits, he could not help admiring them.He jeered at the way in which she arranged the furniture they hadbrought from Moscow; rearranged their room; hung up curtains; preparedrooms for visitors; a room for Dolly; saw after an abode for her newmaid; ordered dinner of the old cook; came into collision with AgafeaMihalovna, taking from her the charge of the stores. He saw how the oldcook smiled, admiring her, and listening to her inexperienced,impossible orders, how mournfully and tenderly Agafea Mihalovna shookher head over the young mistress’s new arrangements. He saw that Kittywas extraordinarily sweet when, laughing and crying, she came to tellhim that her maid, Masha, was used to looking upon her as her younglady, and so no one obeyed her. It seemed to him sweet, but strange, andhe thought it would have been better without this.
He did not know how great a sense of change she was experiencing; she,who at home had sometimes wanted some favorite dish, or sweets, withoutthe possibility of getting either, now could order what she liked, buypounds of sweets, spend as much money as she liked, and order anypuddings she pleased.
She was dreaming with delight now of Dolly’s coming to them with herchildren, especially because she would order for the children theirfavorite puddings and Dolly would appreciate all her new housekeeping.She did not know herself why and wherefore, but the arranging of herhouse had an irresistible attraction for her. Instinctively feeling theapproach of spring, and knowing that there would be days of roughweather too, she built her nest as best she could, and was in haste atthe same time to build it and to learn how to do it.
This care for domestic details in Kitty, so opposed to Levin’s ideal ofexalted happiness, was at first one of the disappointments; and thissweet care of her household, the aim of which he did not understand, butcould not help loving, was one of the new happy surprises.
Another disappointment and happy surprise came in their quarrels. Levincould never have conceived that between him and his wife any relationscould arise other than tender, respectful and loving, and all at once inthe very early days they quarreled, so that she said he did not care forher, that he cared for no one but himself, burst into tears, and wrungher arms.
This first quarrel arose from Levin’s having gone out to a new farmhouseand having been away half an hour too long, because he had tried to gethome by a short cut and had lost his way. He drove home thinking ofnothing but her, of her love, of his own happiness, and the nearer hedrew to home, the warmer was his tenderness for her. He ran into theroom with the same feeling, with an even stronger feeling than he hadhad when he reached the Shtcherbatskys’ house to make his offer. Andsuddenly he was met by a lowering expression he had never seen in her.He would have kissed her; she pushed him away.
"What is it?"
"You’ve been enjoying yourself," she began, trying to be calm andspiteful. But as soon as she opened her mouth, a stream of reproach, ofsenseless jealousy, of all that had been torturing her during that halfhour which she had spent sitting motionless at the window, burst fromher. It was only then, for the first time, that he clearly understoodwhat he had not understood when he led her out of the church after thewedding. He felt now that he was not simply close to her, but that hedid not know where he ended and she began. He felt this from theagonizing sensation of division that he experienced at that instant. Hewas offended for the first instant, but the very same second he feltthat he could not be offended by her, that she was himself. He felt forthe first moment as a man feels when, having suddenly received a violentblow from behind, he turns round, angry and eager to avenge himself, tolook for his antagonist, and finds that it is he himself who hasaccidentally struck himself, that there is no one to be angry with, andthat he must put up with and try to soothe the pain.
Never afterwards did he feel it with such intensity, but this first timehe could not for a long while get over it. His natural feeling urged himto defend himself, to prove to her she was wrong; but to prove her wrongwould mean irritating her still more and making the rupture greater thatwas the cause of all his suffering. One habitual feeling impelled him toget rid of the blame and to pass it on to her. Another feeling, evenstronger, impelled him as quickly as possible to smooth over the rupturewithout letting it grow greater. To remain under such undeservedreproach was wretched, but to make her suffer by justifying himself wasworse still. Like a man half-awake in an agony of pain, he wanted totear out, to fling away the aching place, and coming to his senses, hefelt that the aching place was himself. He could do nothing but try tohelp the aching place to bear it, and this he tried to do.
They made peace. She, recognizing that she was wrong, though she did notsay so, became tenderer to him, and they experienced new, redoubledhappiness in their love. But that did not prevent such quarrels fromhappening again, and exceedingly often too, on the most unexpected andtrivial grounds. These quarrels frequently arose from the fact that theydid not yet know what was of importance to each other and that all thisearly period they were both often in a bad temper. When one was in agood temper, and the other in a bad temper, the peace was not broken;but when both happened to be in an ill-humor, quarrels sprang up fromsuch incomprehensibly trifling causes, that they could never rememberafterwards what they had quarreled about. It is true that when they wereboth in a good temper their enjoyment of life was redoubled. But stillthis first period of their married life was a difficult time for them.
During all this early time they had a peculiarly vivid sense of tension,as it were, a tugging in opposite directions of the chain by which theywere bound. Altogether their honeymoon—that is to say, the month aftertheir wedding—from which from tradition Levin expected so much, was notmerely not a time of sweetness, but remained in the memories of both asthe bitterest and most humiliating period in their lives. They bothalike tried in later life to blot out from their memories all themonstrous, shameful incidents of that morbid period, when both wererarely in a normal frame of mind, both were rarely quite themselves.
It was only in the third month of their married life, after their returnfrom Moscow, where they had been staying for a month, that their lifebegan to go more smoothly.


Chapter 15

They had just come back from Moscow, and were glad to be alone. He wassitting at the writing table in his study, writing. She, wearing thedark lilac dress she had worn during the first days of their marriedlife, and put on again today, a dress particularly remembered and lovedby him, was sitting on the sofa, the same old-fashioned leather sofawhich had always stood in the study in Levin’s father’s andgrandfather’s days. She was sewing at _broderie anglaise_. He thoughtand wrote, never losing the happy consciousness of her presence. Hiswork, both on the land and on the book, in which the principles of thenew land system were to be laid down, had not been abandoned; but justas formerly these pursuits and ideas had seemed to him petty and trivialin comparison with the darkness that overspread all life, now theyseemed as unimportant and petty in comparison with the life that laybefore him suffused with the brilliant light of happiness. He went onwith his work, but he felt now that the center of gravity of hisattention had passed to something else, and that consequently he lookedat his work quite differently and more clearly. Formerly this work hadbeen for him an escape from life. Formerly he had felt that without thiswork his life would be too gloomy. Now these pursuits were necessary forhim that life might not be too uniformly bright. Taking up hismanuscript, reading through what he had written, he found with pleasurethat the work was worth his working at. Many of his old ideas seemed tohim superfluous and extreme, but many blanks became distinct to him whenhe reviewed the whole thing in his memory. He was writing now a newchapter on the causes of the present disastrous condition of agriculturein Russia. He maintained that the poverty of Russia arises not merelyfrom the anomalous distribution of landed property and misdirectedreforms, but that what had contributed of late years to this result wasthe civilization from without abnormally grafted upon Russia, especiallyfacilities of communication, as railways, leading to centralization intowns, the development of luxury, and the consequent development ofmanufactures, credit and its accompaniment of speculation—all to thedetriment of agriculture. It seemed to him that in a normal developmentof wealth in a state all these phenomena would arise only when aconsiderable amount of labor had been put into agriculture, when it hadcome under regular, or at least definite, conditions; that the wealth ofa country ought to increase proportionally, and especially in such a waythat other sources of wealth should not outstrip agriculture; that inharmony with a certain stage of agriculture there should be means ofcommunication corresponding to it, and that in our unsettled conditionof the land, railways, called into being by political and not byeconomic needs, were premature, and instead of promoting agriculture, aswas expected of them, they were competing with agriculture and promotingthe development of manufactures and credit, and so arresting itsprogress; and that just as the one-sided and premature development ofone organ in an animal would hinder its general development, so in thegeneral development of wealth in Russia, credit, facilities ofcommunication, manufacturing activity, indubitably necessary in Europe,where they had arisen in their proper time, had with us only done harm,by throwing into the background the chief question calling forsettlement—the question of the organization of agriculture.
While he was writing his ideas she was thinking how unnaturally cordialher husband had been to young Prince Tcharsky, who had, with great wantof tact, flirted with her the day before they left Moscow. "He’sjealous," she thought. "Goodness! how sweet and silly he is! He’sjealous of me! If he knew that I think no more of them than of Piotr thecook," she thought, looking at his head and red neck with a feeling ofpossession strange to herself. "Though it’s a pity to take him from hiswork (but he has plenty of time!), I must look at his face; will he feelI’m looking at him? I wish he’d turn round ... I’ll _will_ him to!" andshe opened her eyes wide, as though to intensify the influence of hergaze.
"Yes, they draw away all the sap and give a false appearance ofprosperity," he muttered, stopping to write, and, feeling that she waslooking at him and smiling, he looked round.
"Well?" he queried, smiling, and getting up.
"He looked round," she thought.
"It’s nothing; I wanted you to look round," she said, watching him, andtrying to guess whether he was vexed at being interrupted or not.
"How happy we are alone together!—I am, that is," he said, going up toher with a radiant smile of happiness.
"I’m just as happy. I’ll never go anywhere, especially not to Moscow."
"And what were you thinking about?"
"I? I was thinking.... No, no, go along, go on writing; don’t breakoff," she said, pursing up her lips, "and I must cut out these littleholes now, do you see?"
She took up her scissors and began cutting them out.
"No; tell me, what was it?" he said, sitting down beside her andwatching the tiny scissors moving round.
"Oh! what was I thinking about? I was thinking about Moscow, about theback of your head."
"Why should I, of all people, have such happiness! It’s unnatural, toogood," he said, kissing her hand.
"I feel quite the opposite; the better things are, the more natural itseems to me."
"And you’ve got a little curl loose," he said, carefully turning herhead round.
"A little curl, oh yes. No, no, we are busy at our work!"
Work did not progress further, and they darted apart from one anotherlike culprits when Kouzma came in to announce that tea was ready.
"Have they come from the town?" Levin asked Kouzma.
"They’ve just come; they’re unpacking the things."
"Come quickly," she said to him as she went out of the study, "or else Ishall read your letters without you."
Left alone, after putting his manuscripts together in the new portfoliobought by her, he washed his hands at the new washstand with the elegantfittings, that had all made their appearance with her. Levin smiled athis own thoughts, and shook his head disapprovingly at those thoughts; afeeling akin to remorse fretted him. There was something shameful,effeminate, Capuan, as he called it to himself, in his present mode oflife. "It’s not right to go on like this," he thought. "It’ll soon bethree months, and I’m doing next to nothing. Today, almost for the firsttime, I set to work seriously, and what happened? I did nothing butbegin and throw it aside. Even my ordinary pursuits I have almost givenup. On the land I scarcely walk or drive about at all to look afterthings. Either I am loath to leave her, or I see she’s dull alone. And Iused to think that, before marriage, life was nothing much, somehowdidn’t count, but that after marriage, life began in earnest. And herealmost three months have passed, and I have spent my time so idly andunprofitably. No, this won’t do; I must begin. Of course, it’s not herfault. She’s not to blame in any way. I ought myself to be firmer, tomaintain my masculine independence of action; or else I shall get intosuch ways, and she’ll get used to them too.... Of course she’s not toblame," he told himself.
But it is hard for anyone who is dissatisfied not to blame someone else,and especially the person nearest of all to him, for the ground of hisdissatisfaction. And it vaguely came into Levin’s mind that she herselfwas not to blame (she could not be to blame for anything), but what wasto blame was her education, too superficial and frivolous. ("That foolTcharsky: she wanted, I know, to stop him, but didn’t know how to.")"Yes, apart from her interest in the house (that she has), apart fromdress and _broderie anglaise_, she has no serious interests. No interestin her work, in the estate, in the peasants, nor in music, though she’srather good at it, nor in reading. She does nothing, and is perfectlysatisfied." Levin, in his heart, censured this, and did not as yetunderstand that she was preparing for that period of activity which wasto come for her when she would at once be the wife of her husband andmistress of the house, and would bear, and nurse, and bring up children.He knew not that she was instinctively aware of this, and preparingherself for this time of terrible toil, did not reproach herself for themoments of carelessness and happiness in her love that she enjoyed nowwhile gaily building her nest for the future.


Chapter 16

When Levin went upstairs, his wife was sitting near the new silversamovar behind the new tea service, and, having settled old AgafeaMihalovna at a little table with a full cup of tea, was reading a letterfrom Dolly, with whom they were in continual and frequentcorrespondence.
"You see, your good lady’s settled me here, told me to sit a bit withher," said Agafea Mihalovna, smiling affectionately at Kitty.
In these words of Agafea Mihalovna, Levin read the final act of thedrama which had been enacted of late between her and Kitty. He saw that,in spite of Agafea Mihalovna’s feelings being hurt by a new mistresstaking the reins of government out of her hands, Kitty had yet conqueredher and made her love her.
"Here, I opened your letter too," said Kitty, handing him an illiterateletter. "It’s from that woman, I think, your brother’s..." she said. "Idid not read it through. This is from my people and from Dolly. Fancy!Dolly took Tanya and Grisha to a children’s ball at the Sarmatskys’:Tanya was a French marquise."
But Levin did not hear her. Flushing, he took the letter from MaryaNikolaevna, his brother’s former mistress, and began to read it. Thiswas the second letter he had received from Marya Nikolaevna. In thefirst letter, Marya Nikolaevna wrote that his brother had sent her awayfor no fault of hers, and, with touching simplicity, added that thoughshe was in want again, she asked for nothing, and wished for nothing,but was only tormented by the thought that Nikolay Dmitrievitch wouldcome to grief without her, owing to the weak state of his health, andbegged his brother to look after him. Now she wrote quite differently.She had found Nikolay Dmitrievitch, had again made it up with him inMoscow, and had moved with him to a provincial town, where he hadreceived a post in the government service. But that he had quarreledwith the head official, and was on his way back to Moscow, only he hadbeen taken so ill on the road that it was doubtful if he would everleave his bed again, she wrote. "It’s always of you he has talked, and,besides, he has no more money left."
"Read this; Dolly writes about you," Kitty was beginning, with a smile;but she stopped suddenly, noticing the changed expression on herhusband’s face.
"What is it? What’s the matter?"
"She writes to me that Nikolay, my brother, is at death’s door. I shallgo to him."
Kitty’s face changed at once. Thoughts of Tanya as a marquise, of Dolly,all had vanished.
"When are you going?" she said.
"Tomorrow."
"And I will go with you, can I?" she said.
"Kitty! What are you thinking of?" he said reproachfully.
"How do you mean?" offended that he should seem to take her suggestionunwillingly and with vexation. "Why shouldn’t I go? I shan’t be in yourway. I..."
"I’m going because my brother is dying," said Levin. "Why should you..."
"Why? For the same reason as you."
"And, at a moment of such gravity for me, she only thinks of her beingdull by herself," thought Levin. And this lack of candor in a matter ofsuch gravity infuriated him.
"It’s out of the question," he said sternly.
Agafea Mihalovna, seeing that it was coming to a quarrel, gently putdown her cup and withdrew. Kitty did not even notice her. The tone inwhich her husband had said the last words wounded her, especiallybecause he evidently did not believe what she had said.
"I tell you, that if you go, I shall come with you; I shall certainlycome," she said hastily and wrathfully. "Why out of the question? Why doyou say it’s out of the question?"
"Because it’ll be going God knows where, by all sorts of roads and toall sorts of hotels. You would be a hindrance to me," said Levin, tryingto be cool.
"Not at all. I don’t want anything. Where you can go, I can...."
"Well, for one thing then, because this woman’s there whom you can’tmeet."
"I don’t know and don’t care to know who’s there and what. I know thatmy husband’s brother is dying and my husband is going to him, and I gowith my husband too...."
"Kitty! Don’t get angry. But just think a little: this is a matter ofsuch importance that I can’t bear to think that you should bring in afeeling of weakness, of dislike to being left alone. Come, you’ll bedull alone, so go and stay at Moscow a little."
"There, you always ascribe base, vile motives to me," she said withtears of wounded pride and fury. "I didn’t mean, it wasn’t weakness, itwasn’t ... I feel that it’s my duty to be with my husband when he’s introuble, but you try on purpose to hurt me, you try on purpose not tounderstand...."
"No; this is awful! To be such a slave!" cried Levin, getting up, andunable to restrain his anger any longer. But at the same second he feltthat he was beating himself.
"Then why did you marry? You could have been free. Why did you, if youregret it?" she said, getting up and running away into the drawing room.
When he went to her, she was sobbing.
He began to speak, trying to find words not to dissuade but simply tosoothe her. But she did not heed him, and would not agree to anything.He bent down to her and took her hand, which resisted him. He kissed herhand, kissed her hair, kissed her hand again—still she was silent. Butwhen he took her face in both his hands and said "Kitty!" she suddenlyrecovered herself, and began to cry, and they were reconciled.
It was decided that they should go together the next day. Levin told hiswife that he believed she wanted to go simply in order to be of use,agreed that Marya Nikolaevna’s being with his brother did not make hergoing improper, but he set off at the bottom of his heart dissatisfiedboth with her and with himself. He was dissatisfied with her for beingunable to make up her mind to let him go when it was necessary (and howstrange it was for him to think that he, so lately hardly daring tobelieve in such happiness as that she could love him—now was unhappybecause she loved him too much!), and he was dissatisfied with himselffor not showing more strength of will. Even greater was the feeling ofdisagreement at the bottom of his heart as to her not needing toconsider the woman who was with his brother, and he thought with horrorof all the contingencies they might meet with. The mere idea of hiswife, his Kitty, being in the same room with a common wench, set himshuddering with horror and loathing.


Chapter 17

The hotel of the provincial town where Nikolay Levin was lying ill wasone of those provincial hotels which are constructed on the newest modelof modern improvements, with the best intentions of cleanliness,comfort, and even elegance, but owing to the public that patronizesthem, are with astounding rapidity transformed into filthy taverns witha pretension of modern improvement that only makes them worse than theold-fashioned, honestly filthy hotels. This hotel had already reachedthat stage, and the soldier in a filthy uniform smoking in the entry,supposed to stand for a hall-porter, and the cast-iron, slippery, dark,and disagreeable staircase, and the free and easy waiter in a filthyfrock coat, and the common dining room with a dusty bouquet of waxflowers adorning the table, and filth, dust, and disorder everywhere,and at the same time the sort of modern up-to-date self-complacentrailway uneasiness of this hotel, aroused a most painful feeling inLevin after their fresh young life, especially because the impression offalsity made by the hotel was so out of keeping with what awaited them.
As is invariably the case, after they had been asked at what price theywanted rooms, it appeared that there was not one decent room for them;one decent room had been taken by the inspector of railroads, another bya lawyer from Moscow, a third by Princess Astafieva from the country.There remained only one filthy room, next to which they promised thatanother should be empty by the evening. Feeling angry with his wifebecause what he had expected had come to pass, which was that at themoment of arrival, when his heart throbbed with emotion and anxiety toknow how his brother was getting on, he should have to be seeing afterher, instead of rushing straight to his brother, Levin conducted her tothe room assigned them.
"Go, do go!" she said, looking at him with timid and guilty eyes.
He went out of the door without a word, and at once stumbled over MaryaNikolaevna, who had heard of his arrival and had not dared to go in tosee him. She was just the same as when he saw her in Moscow; the samewoolen gown, and bare arms and neck, and the same good-naturedly stupid,pockmarked face, only a little plumper.
"Well, how is he? how is he?"
"Very bad. He can’t get up. He has kept expecting you. He.... Are you... with your wife?"
Levin did not for the first moment understand what it was confused her,but she immediately enlightened him.
"I’ll go away. I’ll go down to the kitchen," she brought out. "NikolayDmitrievitch will be delighted. He heard about it, and knows your lady,and remembers her abroad."
Levin realized that she meant his wife, and did not know what answer tomake.
"Come along, come along to him!" he said.
But as soon as he moved, the door of his room opened and Kitty peepedout. Levin crimsoned both from shame and anger with his wife, who hadput herself and him in such a difficult position; but Marya Nikolaevnacrimsoned still more. She positively shrank together and flushed to thepoint of tears, and clutching the ends of her apron in both hands,twisted them in her red fingers without knowing what to say and what todo.
For the first instant Levin saw an expression of eager curiosity in theeyes with which Kitty looked at this awful woman, so incomprehensible toher; but it lasted only a single instant.
"Well! how is he?" she turned to her husband and then to her.
"But one can’t go on talking in the passage like this!" Levin said,looking angrily at a gentleman who walked jauntily at that instantacross the corridor, as though about his affairs.
"Well then, come in," said Kitty, turning to Marya Nikolaevna, who hadrecovered herself, but noticing her husband’s face of dismay, "or go on;go, and then come for me," she said, and went back into the room.
Levin went to his brother’s room. He had not in the least expected whathe saw and felt in his brother’s room. He had expected to find him inthe same state of self-deception which he had heard was so frequent withthe consumptive, and which had struck him so much during his brother’svisit in the autumn. He had expected to find the physical signs of theapproach of death more marked—greater weakness, greater emaciation, butstill almost the same condition of things. He had expected himself tofeel the same distress at the loss of the brother he loved and the samehorror in face of death as he had felt then, only in a greater degree.And he had prepared himself for this; but he found something utterlydifferent.
In a little dirty room with the painted panels of its walls filthy withspittle, and conversation audible through the thin partition from thenext room, in a stifling atmosphere saturated with impurities, on abedstead moved away from the wall, there lay covered with a quilt, abody. One arm of this body was above the quilt, and the wrist, huge as arake-handle, was attached, inconceivably it seemed, to the thin, longbone of the arm smooth from the beginning to the middle. The head laysideways on the pillow. Levin could see the scanty locks wet with sweaton the temples and tense, transparent-looking forehead.
"It cannot be that that fearful body was my brother Nikolay?" thoughtLevin. But he went closer, saw the face, and doubt became impossible. Inspite of the terrible change in the face, Levin had only to glance atthose eager eyes raised at his approach, only to catch the faintmovement of the mouth under the sticky mustache, to realize the terribletruth that this death-like body was his living brother.
The glittering eyes looked sternly and reproachfully at his brother ashe drew near. And immediately this glance established a livingrelationship between living men. Levin immediately felt the reproach inthe eyes fixed on him, and felt remorse at his own happiness.
When Konstantin took him by the hand, Nikolay smiled. The smile wasfaint, scarcely perceptible, and in spite of the smile the sternexpression of the eyes was unchanged.
"You did not expect to find me like this," he articulated with effort.
"Yes ... no," said Levin, hesitating over his words. "How was it youdidn’t let me know before, that is, at the time of my wedding? I madeinquiries in all directions."
He had to talk so as not to be silent, and he did not know what to say,especially as his brother made no reply, and simply stared withoutdropping his eyes, and evidently penetrated to the inner meaning of eachword. Levin told his brother that his wife had come with him. Nikolayexpressed pleasure, but said he was afraid of frightening her by hiscondition. A silence followed. Suddenly Nikolay stirred, and began tosay something. Levin expected something of peculiar gravity andimportance from the expression of his face, but Nikolay began speakingof his health. He found fault with the doctor, regretting he had not acelebrated Moscow doctor. Levin saw that he still hoped.
Seizing the first moment of silence, Levin got up, anxious to escape, ifonly for an instant, from his agonizing emotion, and said that he wouldgo and fetch his wife.
"Very well, and I’ll tell her to tidy up here. It’s dirty and stinkinghere, I expect. Marya! clear up the room," the sick man said witheffort. "Oh, and when you’ve cleared up, go away yourself," he added,looking inquiringly at his brother.
Levin made no answer. Going out into the corridor, he stopped short. Hehad said he would fetch his wife, but now, taking stock of the emotionhe was feeling, he decided that he would try on the contrary to persuadeher not to go in to the sick man. "Why should she suffer as I amsuffering?" he thought.
"Well, how is he?" Kitty asked with a frightened face.
"Oh, it’s awful, it’s awful! What did you come for?" said Levin.
Kitty was silent for a few seconds, looking timidly and ruefully at herhusband; then she went up and took him by the elbow with both hands.
"Kostya! take me to him; it will be easier for us to bear it together.You only take me, take me to him, please, and go away," she said. "Youmust understand that for me to see you, and not to see him, is far morepainful. There I might be a help to you and to him. Please, let me!" shebesought her husband, as though the happiness of her life depended onit.
Levin was obliged to agree, and regaining his composure, and completelyforgetting about Marya Nikolaevna by now, he went again in to hisbrother with Kitty.
Stepping lightly, and continually glancing at her husband, showing him avalorous and sympathetic face, Kitty went into the sick-room, and,turning without haste, noiselessly closed the door. With inaudible stepsshe went quickly to the sick man’s bedside, and going up so that he hadnot to turn his head, she immediately clasped in her fresh young handthe skeleton of his huge hand, pressed it, and began speaking with thatsoft eagerness, sympathetic and not jarring, which is peculiar to women.
"We have met, though we were not acquainted, at Soden," she said. "Younever thought I was to be your sister?"
"You would not have recognized me?" he said, with a radiant smile at herentrance.
"Yes, I should. What a good thing you let us know! Not a day has passedthat Kostya has not mentioned you, and been anxious."
But the sick man’s interest did not last long.
Before she had finished speaking, there had come back into his face thestern, reproachful expression of the dying man’s envy of the living.
"I am afraid you are not quite comfortable here," she said, turning awayfrom his fixed stare, and looking about the room. "We must ask aboutanother room," she said to her husband, "so that we might be nearer."


Chapter 18

Levin could not look calmly at his brother; he could not himself benatural and calm in his presence. When he went in to the sick man, hiseyes and his attention were unconsciously dimmed, and he did not see anddid not distinguish the details of his brother’s position. He smelt theawful odor, saw the dirt, disorder, and miserable condition, and heardthe groans, and felt that nothing could be done to help. It neverentered his head to analyze the details of the sick man’s situation, toconsider how that body was lying under the quilt, how those emaciatedlegs and thighs and spine were lying huddled up, and whether they couldnot be made more comfortable, whether anything could not be done to makethings, if not better, at least less bad. It made his blood run coldwhen he began to think of all these details. He was absolutely convincedthat nothing could be done to prolong his brother’s life or to relievehis suffering. But a sense of his regarding all aid as out of thequestion was felt by the sick man, and exasperated him. And this made itstill more painful for Levin. To be in the sick-room was agony to him,not to be there still worse. And he was continually, on variouspretexts, going out of the room, and coming in again, because he wasunable to remain alone.
But Kitty thought, and felt, and acted quite differently. On seeing thesick man, she pitied him. And pity in her womanly heart did not arouseat all that feeling of horror and loathing that it aroused in herhusband, but a desire to act, to find out all the details of his state,and to remedy them. And since she had not the slightest doubt that itwas her duty to help him, she had no doubt either that it was possible,and immediately set to work. The very details, the mere thought of whichreduced her husband to terror, immediately engaged her attention. Shesent for the doctor, sent to the chemist’s, set the maid who had comewith her and Marya Nikolaevna to sweep and dust and scrub; she herselfwashed up something, washed out something else, laid something under thequilt. Something was by her directions brought into the sick-room,something else was carried out. She herself went several times to herroom, regardless of the men she met in the corridor, got out and broughtin sheets, pillow cases, towels, and shirts.
The waiter, who was busy with a party of engineers dining in the dininghall, came several times with an irate countenance in answer to hersummons, and could not avoid carrying out her orders, as she gave themwith such gracious insistence that there was no evading her. Levin didnot approve of all this; he did not believe it would be of any good tothe patient. Above all, he feared the patient would be angry at it. Butthe sick man, though he seemed and was indifferent about it, was notangry, but only abashed, and on the whole as it were interested in whatshe was doing with him. Coming back from the doctor to whom Kitty hadsent him, Levin, on opening the door, came upon the sick man at theinstant when, by Kitty’s directions, they were changing his linen. Thelong white ridge of his spine, with the huge, prominent shoulder bladesand jutting ribs and vertebrae, was bare, and Marya Nikolaevna and thewaiter were struggling with the sleeve of the night shirt, and could notget the long, limp arm into it. Kitty, hurriedly closing the door afterLevin, was not looking that way; but the sick man groaned, and she movedrapidly towards him.
"Make haste," she said.
"Oh, don’t you come," said the sick man angrily. "I’ll do it mymyself...."
"What say?" queried Marya Nikolaevna. But Kitty heard and saw he wasashamed and uncomfortable at being naked before her.
"I’m not looking, I’m not looking!" she said, putting the arm in. "MaryaNikolaevna, you come this side, you do it," she added.
"Please go for me, there’s a little bottle in my small bag," she said,turning to her husband, "you know, in the side pocket; bring it, please,and meanwhile they’ll finish clearing up here."
Returning with the bottle, Levin found the sick man settled comfortablyand everything about him completely changed. The heavy smell wasreplaced by the smell of aromatic vinegar, which Kitty with pouting lipsand puffed-out, rosy cheeks was squirting through a little pipe. Therewas no dust visible anywhere, a rug was laid by the bedside. On thetable stood medicine bottles and decanters tidily arranged, and thelinen needed was folded up there, and Kitty’s _broderie anglaise_. Onthe other table by the patient’s bed there were candles and drink andpowders. The sick man himself, washed and combed, lay in clean sheets onhigh raised pillows, in a clean night-shirt with a white collar abouthis astoundingly thin neck, and with a new expression of hope lookedfixedly at Kitty.
The doctor brought by Levin, and found by him at the club, was not theone who had been attending Nikolay Levin, as the patient wasdissatisfied with him. The new doctor took up a stethoscope and soundedthe patient, shook his head, prescribed medicine, and with extrememinuteness explained first how to take the medicine and then what dietwas to be kept to. He advised eggs, raw or hardly cooked, and seltzerwater, with warm milk at a certain temperature. When the doctor had goneaway the sick man said something to his brother, of which Levin coulddistinguish only the last words: "Your Katya." By the expression withwhich he gazed at her, Levin saw that he was praising her. He calledindeed to Katya, as he called her.
"I’m much better already," he said. "Why, with you I should have gotwell long ago. How nice it is!" he took her hand and drew it towards hislips, but as though afraid she would dislike it he changed his mind, letit go, and only stroked it. Kitty took his hand in both hers and pressedit.
"Now turn me over on the left side and go to bed," he said.
No one could make out what he said but Kitty; she alone understood. Sheunderstood because she was all the while mentally keeping watch on whathe needed.
"On the other side," she said to her husband, "he always sleeps on thatside. Turn him over, it’s so disagreeable calling the servants. I’m notstrong enough. Can you?" she said to Marya Nikolaevna.
"I’m afraid not," answered Marya Nikolaevna.
Terrible as it was to Levin to put his arms round that terrible body, totake hold of that under the quilt, of which he preferred to knownothing, under his wife’s influence he made his resolute face that sheknew so well, and putting his arms into the bed took hold of the body,but in spite of his own strength he was struck by the strange heavinessof those powerless limbs. While he was turning him over, conscious ofthe huge emaciated arm about his neck, Kitty swiftly and noiselesslyturned the pillow, beat it up and settled in it the sick man’s head,smoothing back his hair, which was sticking again to his moist brow.
The sick man kept his brother’s hand in his own. Levin felt that hemeant to do something with his hand and was pulling it somewhere. Levinyielded with a sinking heart: yes, he drew it to his mouth and kissedit. Levin, shaking with sobs and unable to articulate a word, went outof the room.


Chapter 19

"Thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealedthem unto babes." So Levin thought about his wife as he talked to herthat evening.
Levin thought of the text, not because he considered himself "wise andprudent." He did not so consider himself, but he could not help knowingthat he had more intellect than his wife and Agafea Mihalovna, and hecould not help knowing that when he thought of death, he thought withall the force of his intellect. He knew too that the brains of manygreat men, whose thoughts he had read, had brooded over death and yetknew not a hundredth part of what his wife and Agafea Mihalovna knewabout it. Different as those two women were, Agafea Mihalovna and Katya,as his brother Nikolay had called her, and as Levin particularly likedto call her now, they were quite alike in this. Both knew, without ashade of doubt, what sort of thing life was and what was death, andthough neither of them could have answered, and would even not haveunderstood the questions that presented themselves to Levin, both had nodoubt of the significance of this event, and were precisely alike intheir way of looking at it, which they shared with millions of people.The proof that they knew for a certainty the nature of death lay in thefact that they knew without a second of hesitation how to deal with thedying, and were not frightened of them. Levin and other men like him,though they could have said a great deal about death, obviously did notknow this since they were afraid of death, and were absolutely at a losswhat to do when people were dying. If Levin had been alone now with hisbrother Nikolay, he would have looked at him with terror, and with stillgreater terror waited, and would not have known what else to do.
More than that, he did not know what to say, how to look, how to move.To talk of outside things seemed to him shocking, impossible, to talk ofdeath and depressing subjects—also impossible. To be silent, alsoimpossible. "If I look at him he will think I am studying him, I amafraid; if I don’t look at him, he’ll think I’m thinking of otherthings. If I walk on tiptoe, he will be vexed; to tread firmly, I’mashamed." Kitty evidently did not think of herself, and had no time tothink about herself: she was thinking about him because she knewsomething, and all went well. She told him about herself even and abouther wedding, and smiled and sympathized with him and petted him, andtalked of cases of recovery and all went well; so then she must know.The proof that her behavior and Agafea Mihalovna’s was not instinctive,animal, irrational, was that apart from the physical treatment, therelief of suffering, both Agafea Mihalovna and Kitty required for thedying man something else more important than the physical treatment, andsomething which had nothing in common with physical conditions. AgafeaMihalovna, speaking of the man just dead, had said: "Well, thank God, hetook the sacrament and received absolution; God grant each one of ussuch a death." Katya in just the same way, besides all her care aboutlinen, bedsores, drink, found time the very first day to persuade thesick man of the necessity of taking the sacrament and receivingabsolution.
On getting back from the sick-room to their own two rooms for the night,Levin sat with hanging head not knowing what to do. Not to speak ofsupper, of preparing for bed, of considering what they were going to do,he could not even talk to his wife; he was ashamed to. Kitty, on thecontrary, was more active than usual. She was even livelier than usual.She ordered supper to be brought, herself unpacked their things, andherself helped to make the beds, and did not even forget to sprinklethem with Persian powder. She showed that alertness, that swiftness ofreflection comes out in men before a battle, in conflict, in thedangerous and decisive moments of life—those moments when a man showsonce and for all his value, and that all his past has not been wastedbut has been a preparation for these moments.
Everything went rapidly in her hands, and before it was twelve o’clockall their things were arranged cleanly and tidily in her rooms, in sucha way that the hotel rooms seemed like home: the beds were made,brushes, combs, looking-glasses were put out, table napkins were spread.
Levin felt that it was unpardonable to eat, to sleep, to talk even now,and it seemed to him that every movement he made was unseemly. Shearranged the brushes, but she did it all so that there was nothingshocking in it.
They could neither of them eat, however, and for a long while they couldnot sleep, and did not even go to bed.
"I am very glad I persuaded him to receive extreme unction tomorrow,"she said, sitting in her dressing jacket before her folding lookingglass, combing her soft, fragrant hair with a fine comb. "I have neverseen it, but I know, mamma has told me, there are prayers said forrecovery."
"Do you suppose he can possibly recover?" said Levin, watching a slendertress at the back of her round little head that was continually hiddenwhen she passed the comb through the front.
"I asked the doctor; he said he couldn’t live more than three days. Butcan they be sure? I’m very glad, anyway, that I persuaded him," shesaid, looking askance at her husband through her hair. "Anything ispossible," she added with that peculiar, rather sly expression that wasalways in her face when she spoke of religion.
Since their conversation about religion when they were engaged neitherof them had ever started a discussion of the subject, but she performedall the ceremonies of going to church, saying her prayers, and so on,always with the unvarying conviction that this ought to be so. In spiteof his assertion to the contrary, she was firmly persuaded that he wasas much a Christian as she, and indeed a far better one; and all that hesaid about it was simply one of his absurd masculine freaks, just as hewould say about her _broderie anglaise_ that good people patch holes,but that she cut them on purpose, and so on.
"Yes, you see this woman, Marya Nikolaevna, did not know how to manageall this," said Levin. "And ... I must own I’m very, very glad you came.You are such purity that...." He took her hand and did not kiss it (tokiss her hand in such closeness to death seemed to him improper); hemerely squeezed it with a penitent air, looking at her brightening eyes.
"It would have been miserable for you to be alone," she said, andlifting her hands which hid her cheeks flushing with pleasure, twistedher coil of hair on the nape of her neck and pinned it there. "No," shewent on, "she did not know how.... Luckily, I learned a lot at Soden."
"Surely there are not people there so ill?"
"Worse."
"What’s so awful to me is that I can’t see him as he was when he wasyoung. You would not believe how charming he was as a youth, but I didnot understand him then."
"I can quite, quite believe it. How I feel that we might have beenfriends!" she said; and, distressed at what she had said, she lookedround at her husband, and tears came into her eyes.
"Yes, _might have been_," he said mournfully. "He’s just one of thosepeople of whom they say they’re not for this world."
"But we have many days before us; we must go to bed," said Kitty,glancing at her tiny watch.


Chapter 20

The next day the sick man received the sacrament and extreme unction.During the ceremony Nikolay Levin prayed fervently. His great eyes,fastened on the holy image that was set out on a card table covered witha colored napkin, expressed such passionate prayer and hope that it wasawful to Levin to see it. Levin knew that this passionate prayer andhope would only make him feel more bitterly parting from the life he soloved. Levin knew his brother and the workings of his intellect: he knewthat his unbelief came not from life being easier for him without faith,but had grown up because step by step the contemporary scientificinterpretation of natural phenomena crushed out the possibility offaith; and so he knew that his present return was not a legitimate one,brought about by way of the same working of his intellect, but simply atemporary, interested return to faith in a desperate hope of recovery.Levin knew too that Kitty had strengthened his hope by accounts of themarvelous recoveries she had heard of. Levin knew all this; and it wasagonizingly painful to him to behold the supplicating, hopeful eyes andthe emaciated wrist, lifted with difficulty, making the sign of thecross on the tense brow, and the prominent shoulders and hollow, gaspingchest, which one could not feel consistent with the life the sick manwas praying for. During the sacrament Levin did what he, an unbeliever,had done a thousand times. He said, addressing God, "If Thou dost exist,make this man to recover" (of course this same thing has been repeatedmany times), "and Thou wilt save him and me."
After extreme unction the sick man became suddenly much better. He didnot cough once in the course of an hour, smiled, kissed Kitty’s hand,thanking her with tears, and said he was comfortable, free from pain,and that he felt strong and had an appetite. He even raised himself whenhis soup was brought, and asked for a cutlet as well. Hopelessly ill ashe was, obvious as it was at the first glance that he could not recover,Levin and Kitty were for that hour both in the same state of excitement,happy, though fearful of being mistaken.
"Is he better?"
"Yes, much."
"It’s wonderful."
"There’s nothing wonderful in it."
"Anyway, he’s better," they said in a whisper, smiling to one another.
This self-deception was not of long duration. The sick man fell into aquiet sleep, but he was waked up half an hour later by his cough. Andall at once every hope vanished in those about him and in himself. Thereality of his suffering crushed all hopes in Levin and Kitty and in thesick man himself, leaving no doubt, no memory even of past hopes.
Without referring to what he had believed in half an hour before, asthough ashamed even to recall it, he asked for iodine to inhale in abottle covered with perforated paper. Levin gave him the bottle, and thesame look of passionate hope with which he had taken the sacrament wasnow fastened on his brother, demanding from him the confirmation of thedoctor’s words that inhaling iodine worked wonders.
"Is Katya not here?" he gasped, looking round while Levin reluctantlyassented to the doctor’s words. "No; so I can say it.... It was for hersake I went through that farce. She’s so sweet; but you and I can’tdeceive ourselves. This is what I believe in," he said, and, squeezingthe bottle in his bony hand, he began breathing over it.
At eight o’clock in the evening Levin and his wife were drinking tea intheir room when Marya Nikolaevna ran in to them breathlessly. She waspale, and her lips were quivering. "He is dying!" she whispered. "I’mafraid will die this minute."
Both of them ran to him. He was sitting raised up with one elbow on thebed, his long back bent, and his head hanging low.
"How do you feel?" Levin asked in a whisper, after a silence.
"I feel I’m setting off," Nikolay said with difficulty, but with extremedistinctness, screwing the words out of himself. He did not raise hishead, but simply turned his eyes upwards, without their reaching hisbrother’s face. "Katya, go away!" he added.
Levin jumped up, and with a peremptory whisper made her go out.
"I’m setting off," he said again.
"Why do you think so?" said Levin, so as to say something.
"Because I’m setting off," he repeated, as though he had a liking forthe phrase. "It’s the end."
Marya Nikolaevna went up to him.
"You had better lie down; you’d be easier," she said.
"I shall lie down soon enough," he pronounced slowly, "when I’m dead,"he said sarcastically, wrathfully. "Well, you can lay me down if youlike."
Levin laid his brother on his back, sat down beside him, and gazed athis face, holding his breath. The dying man lay with closed eyes, butthe muscles twitched from time to time on his forehead, as with onethinking deeply and intensely. Levin involuntarily thought with him ofwhat it was that was happening to him now, but in spite of all hismental efforts to go along with him he saw by the expression of thatcalm, stern face that for the dying man all was growing clearer andclearer that was still as dark as ever for Levin.
"Yes, yes, so," the dying man articulated slowly at intervals. "Wait alittle." He was silent. "Right!" he pronounced all at once reassuringly,as though all were solved for him. "O Lord!" he murmured, and sigheddeeply.
Marya Nikolaevna felt his feet. "They’re getting cold," she whispered.
For a long while, a very long while it seemed to Levin, the sick man laymotionless. But he was still alive, and from time to time he sighed.Levin by now was exhausted from mental strain. He felt that, with nomental effort, could he understand what it was that was _right_. Hecould not even think of the problem of death itself, but with no will ofhis own thoughts kept coming to him of what he had to do next; closingthe dead man’s eyes, dressing him, ordering the coffin. And, strange tosay, he felt utterly cold, and was not conscious of sorrow nor of loss,less still of pity for his brother. If he had any feeling for hisbrother at that moment, it was envy for the knowledge the dying man hadnow that he could not have.
A long time more he sat over him so, continually expecting the end. Butthe end did not come. The door opened and Kitty appeared. Levin got upto stop her. But at the moment he was getting up, he caught the sound ofthe dying man stirring.
"Don’t go away," said Nikolay and held out his hand. Levin gave him his,and angrily waved to his wife to go away.
With the dying man’s hand in his hand, he sat for half an hour, an hour,another hour. He did not think of death at all now. He wondered whatKitty was doing; who lived in the next room; whether the doctor lived ina house of his own. He longed for food and for sleep. He cautiously drewaway his hand and felt the feet. The feet were cold, but the sick manwas still breathing. Levin tried again to move away on tiptoe, but thesick man stirred again and said: "Don’t go."
                                  ――――
The dawn came; the sick man’s condition was unchanged. Levin stealthilywithdrew his hand, and without looking at the dying man, went off to hisown room and went to sleep. When he woke up, instead of news of hisbrother’s death which he expected, he learned that the sick man hadreturned to his earlier condition. He had begun sitting up again,coughing, had begun eating again, talking again, and again had ceased totalk of death, again had begun to express hope of his recovery, and hadbecome more irritable and more gloomy than ever. No one, neither hisbrother nor Kitty, could soothe him. He was angry with everyone, andsaid nasty things to everyone, reproached everyone for his sufferings,and insisted that they should get him a celebrated doctor from Moscow.To all inquiries made him as to how he felt, he made the same answerwith an expression of vindictive reproachfulness, "I’m sufferinghorribly, intolerably!"
The sick man was suffering more and more, especially from bedsores,which it was impossible now to remedy, and grew more and more angry witheveryone about him, blaming them for everything, and especially for nothaving brought him a doctor from Moscow. Kitty tried in every possibleway to relieve him, to soothe him; but it was all in vain, and Levin sawthat she herself was exhausted both physically and morally, though shewould not admit it. The sense of death, which had been evoked in all byhis taking leave of life on the night when he had sent for his brother,was broken up. Everyone knew that he must inevitably die soon, that hewas half dead already. Everyone wished for nothing but that he shoulddie as soon as possible, and everyone, concealing this, gave himmedicines, tried to find remedies and doctors, and deceived him andthemselves and each other. All this was falsehood, disgusting,irreverent deceit. And owing to the bent of his character, and becausehe loved the dying man more than anyone else did, Levin was mostpainfully conscious of this deceit.
Levin, who had long been possessed by the idea of reconciling hisbrothers, at least in face of death, had written to his brother, SergeyIvanovitch, and having received an answer from him, he read this letterto the sick man. Sergey Ivanovitch wrote that he could not come himself,and in touching terms he begged his brother’s forgiveness.
The sick man said nothing.
"What am I to write to him?" said Levin. "I hope you are not angry withhim?"
"No, not the least!" Nikolay answered, vexed at the question. "Tell himto send me a doctor."
Three more days of agony followed; the sick man was still in the samecondition. The sense of longing for his death was felt by everyone nowat the mere sight of him, by the waiters and the hotel-keeper and allthe people staying in the hotel, and the doctor and Marya Nikolaevna andLevin and Kitty. The sick man alone did not express this feeling, but onthe contrary was furious at their not getting him doctors, and went ontaking medicine and talking of life. Only at rare moments, when theopium gave him an instant’s relief from the never-ceasing pain, he wouldsometimes, half asleep, utter what was ever more intense in his heartthan in all the others: "Oh, if it were only the end!" or: "When will itbe over?"
His sufferings, steadily growing more intense, did their work andprepared him for death. There was no position in which he was not inpain, there was not a minute in which he was unconscious of it, not alimb, not a part of his body that did not ache and cause him agony. Eventhe memories, the impressions, the thoughts of this body awakened in himnow the same aversion as the body itself. The sight of other people,their remarks, his own reminiscences, everything was for him a source ofagony. Those about him felt this, and instinctively did not allowthemselves to move freely, to talk, to express their wishes before him.All his life was merged in the one feeling of suffering and desire to berid of it.
There was evidently coming over him that revulsion that would make himlook upon death as the goal of his desires, as happiness. Hitherto eachindividual desire, aroused by suffering or privation, such as hunger,fatigue, thirst, had been satisfied by some bodily function givingpleasure. But now no physical craving or suffering received relief, andthe effort to relieve them only caused fresh suffering. And so alldesires were merged in one—the desire to be rid of all his sufferingsand their source, the body. But he had no words to express this desireof deliverance, and so he did not speak of it, and from habit asked forthe satisfaction of desires which could not now be satisfied. "Turn meover on the other side," he would say, and immediately after he wouldask to be turned back again as before. "Give me some broth. Take awaythe broth. Talk of something: why are you silent?" And directly theybegan to talk he would close his eyes, and would show weariness,indifference, and loathing.
On the tenth day from their arrival at the town, Kitty was unwell. Shesuffered from headache and sickness, and she could not get up all themorning.
The doctor opined that the indisposition arose from fatigue andexcitement, and prescribed rest.
After dinner, however, Kitty got up and went as usual with her work tothe sick man. He looked at her sternly when she came in, and smiledcontemptuously when she said she had been unwell. That day he wascontinually blowing his nose, and groaning piteously.
"How do you feel?" she asked him.
"Worse," he articulated with difficulty. "In pain!"
"In pain, where?"
"Everywhere."
"It will be over today, you will see," said Marya Nikolaevna. Though itwas said in a whisper, the sick man, whose hearing Levin had noticed wasvery keen, must have heard. Levin said hush to her, and looked round atthe sick man. Nikolay had heard; but these words produced no effect onhim. His eyes had still the same intense, reproachful look.
"Why do you think so?" Levin asked her, when she had followed him intothe corridor.
"He has begun picking at himself," said Marya Nikolaevna.
"How do you mean?"
"Like this," she said, tugging at the folds of her woolen skirt. Levinnoticed, indeed, that all that day the patient pulled at himself, as itwere, trying to snatch something away.
Marya Nikolaevna’s prediction came true. Towards night the sick man wasnot able to lift his hands, and could only gaze before him with the sameintensely concentrated expression in his eyes. Even when his brother orKitty bent over him, so that he could see them, he looked just the same.Kitty sent for the priest to read the prayer for the dying.
While the priest was reading it, the dying man did not show any sign oflife; his eyes were closed. Levin, Kitty, and Marya Nikolaevna stood atthe bedside. The priest had not quite finished reading the prayer whenthe dying man stretched, sighed, and opened his eyes. The priest, onfinishing the prayer, put the cross to the cold forehead, then slowlyreturned it to the stand, and after standing for two minutes more insilence, he touched the huge, bloodless hand that was turning cold.
"He is gone," said the priest, and would have moved away; but suddenlythere was a faint stir in the mustaches of the dead man that seemedglued together, and quite distinctly in the hush they heard from thebottom of the chest the sharply defined sounds:
"Not quite ... soon."
And a minute later the face brightened, a smile came out under themustaches, and the women who had gathered round began carefully layingout the corpse.
The sight of his brother, and the nearness of death, revived in Levinthat sense of horror in face of the insoluble enigma, together with thenearness and inevitability of death, that had come upon him that autumnevening when his brother had come to him. This feeling was now evenstronger than before; even less than before did he feel capable ofapprehending the meaning of death, and its inevitability rose up beforehim more terrible than ever. But now, thanks to his wife’s presence,that feeling did not reduce him to despair. In spite of death, he feltthe need of life and love. He felt that love saved him from despair, andthat this love, under the menace of despair, had become still strongerand purer. The one mystery of death, still unsolved, had scarcely passedbefore his eyes, when another mystery had arisen, as insoluble, urginghim to love and to life.
The doctor confirmed his suppositions in regard to Kitty. Herindisposition was a symptom that she was with child.


Chapter 21

From the moment when Alexey Alexandrovitch understood from hisinterviews with Betsy and with Stepan Arkadyevitch that all that wasexpected of him was to leave his wife in peace, without burdening herwith his presence, and that his wife herself desired this, he felt sodistraught that he could come to no decision of himself; he did not knowhimself what he wanted now, and putting himself in the hands of thosewho were so pleased to interest themselves in his affairs, he meteverything with unqualified assent. It was only when Anna had left hishouse, and the English governess sent to ask him whether she should dinewith him or separately, that for the first time he clearly comprehendedhis position, and was appalled by it. Most difficult of all in thisposition was the fact that he could not in any way connect and reconcilehis past with what was now. It was not the past when he had livedhappily with his wife that troubled him. The transition from that pastto a knowledge of his wife’s unfaithfulness he had lived throughmiserably already; that state was painful, but he could understand it.If his wife had then, on declaring to him her unfaithfulness, left him,he would have been wounded, unhappy, but he would not have been in thehopeless position—incomprehensible to himself—in which he felt himselfnow. He could not now reconcile his immediate past, his tenderness, hislove for his sick wife, and for the other man’s child with what was nowthe case, that is with the fact that, as it were, in return for all thishe now found himself alone, put to shame, a laughing-stock, needed by noone, and despised by everyone.
For the first two days after his wife’s departure Alexey Alexandrovitchreceived applicants for assistance and his chief secretary, drove to thecommittee, and went down to dinner in the dining room as usual. Withoutgiving himself a reason for what he was doing, he strained every nerveof his being for those two days, simply to preserve an appearance ofcomposure, and even of indifference. Answering inquiries about thedisposition of Anna Arkadyevna’s rooms and belongings, he had exercisedimmense self-control to appear like a man in whose eyes what hadoccurred was not unforeseen nor out of the ordinary course of events,and he attained his aim: no one could have detected in him signs ofdespair. But on the second day after her departure, when Korney gave hima bill from a fashionable draper’s shop, which Anna had forgotten topay, and announced that the clerk from the shop was waiting, AlexeyAlexandrovitch told him to show the clerk up.
"Excuse me, your excellency, for venturing to trouble you. But if youdirect us to apply to her excellency, would you graciously oblige uswith her address?"
Alexey Alexandrovitch pondered, as it seemed to the clerk, and all atonce, turning round, he sat down at the table. Letting his head sinkinto his hands, he sat for a long while in that position, several timesattempted to speak and stopped short. Korney, perceiving his master’semotion, asked the clerk to call another time. Left alone, AlexeyAlexandrovitch recognized that he had not the strength to keep up theline of firmness and composure any longer. He gave orders for thecarriage that was awaiting him to be taken back, and for no one to beadmitted, and he did not go down to dinner.
He felt that he could not endure the weight of universal contempt andexasperation, which he had distinctly seen in the face of the clerk andof Korney, and of everyone, without exception, whom he had met duringthose two days. He felt that he could not turn aside from himself thehatred of men, because that hatred did not come from his being bad (inthat case he could have tried to be better), but from his beingshamefully and repulsively unhappy. He knew that for this, for the veryfact that his heart was torn with grief, they would be merciless to him.He felt that men would crush him as dogs strangle a torn dog yelpingwith pain. He knew that his sole means of security against people was tohide his wounds from them, and instinctively he tried to do this for twodays, but now he felt incapable of keeping up the unequal struggle.
His despair was even intensified by the consciousness that he wasutterly alone in his sorrow. In all Petersburg there was not a humanbeing to whom he could express what he was feeling, who would feel forhim, not as a high official, not as a member of society, but simply as asuffering man; indeed he had not such a one in the whole world.
Alexey Alexandrovitch grew up an orphan. There were two brothers. Theydid not remember their father, and their mother died when AlexeyAlexandrovitch was ten years old. The property was a small one. Theiruncle, Karenin, a government official of high standing, at one time afavorite of the late Tsar, had brought them up.
On completing his high school and university courses with medals, AlexeyAlexandrovitch had, with his uncle’s aid, immediately started in aprominent position in the service, and from that time forward he haddevoted himself exclusively to political ambition. In the high schooland the university, and afterwards in the service, Alexey Alexandrovitchhad never formed a close friendship with anyone. His brother had beenthe person nearest to his heart, but he had a post in the Ministry ofForeign Affairs, and was always abroad, where he had died shortly afterAlexey Alexandrovitch’s marriage.
While he was governor of a province, Anna’s aunt, a wealthy provinciallady, had thrown him—middle-aged as he was, though young for agovernor—with her niece, and had succeeded in putting him in such aposition that he had either to declare himself or to leave the town.Alexey Alexandrovitch was not long in hesitation. There were at the timeas many reasons for the step as against it, and there was nooverbalancing consideration to outweigh his invariable rule ofabstaining when in doubt. But Anna’s aunt had through a commonacquaintance insinuated that he had already compromised the girl, andthat he was in honor bound to make her an offer. He made the offer, andconcentrated on his betrothed and his wife all the feeling of which hewas capable.
The attachment he felt to Anna precluded in his heart every need ofintimate relations with others. And now among all his acquaintances hehad not one friend. He had plenty of so-called connections, but nofriendships. Alexey Alexandrovitch had plenty of people whom he couldinvite to dinner, to whose sympathy he could appeal in any public affairhe was concerned about, whose interest he could reckon upon for anyonehe wished to help, with whom he could candidly discuss other people’sbusiness and affairs of state. But his relations with these people wereconfined to one clearly defined channel, and had a certain routine fromwhich it was impossible to depart. There was one man, a comrade of hisat the university, with whom he had made friends later, and with whom hecould have spoken of a personal sorrow; but this friend had a post inthe Department of Education in a remote part of Russia. Of the people inPetersburg the most intimate and most possible were his chief secretaryand his doctor.
Mihail Vassilievitch Sludin, the chief secretary, was a straightforward,intelligent, good-hearted, and conscientious man, and AlexeyAlexandrovitch was aware of his personal goodwill. But their five yearsof official work together seemed to have put a barrier between them thatcut off warmer relations.
After signing the papers brought him, Alexey Alexandrovitch had sat fora long while in silence, glancing at Mihail Vassilievitch, and severaltimes he attempted to speak, but could not. He had already prepared thephrase: "You have heard of my trouble?" But he ended by saying, asusual: "So you’ll get this ready for me?" and with that dismissed him.
The other person was the doctor, who had also a kindly feeling for him;but there had long existed a taciturn understanding between them thatboth were weighed down by work, and always in a hurry.
Of his women friends, foremost amongst them Countess Lidia Ivanovna,Alexey Alexandrovitch never thought. All women, simply as women, wereterrible and distasteful to him.


Chapter 22

Alexey Alexandrovitch had forgotten the Countess Lidia Ivanovna, but shehad not forgotten him. At the bitterest moment of his lonely despair shecame to him, and without waiting to be announced, walked straight intohis study. She found him as he was sitting with his head in both hands.
"_J’ai forcé la consigne_," she said, walking in with rapid steps andbreathing hard with excitement and rapid exercise. "I have heard all!Alexey Alexandrovitch! Dear friend!" she went on, warmly squeezing hishand in both of hers and gazing with her fine pensive eyes into his.
Alexey Alexandrovitch, frowning, got up, and disengaging his hand, movedher a chair.
"Won’t you sit down, countess? I’m seeing no one because I’m unwell,countess," he said, and his lips twitched.
"Dear friend!" repeated Countess Lidia Ivanovna, never taking her eyesoff his, and suddenly her eyebrows rose at the inner corners, describinga triangle on her forehead, her ugly yellow face became still uglier,but Alexey Alexandrovitch felt that she was sorry for him and waspreparing to cry. And he too was softened; he snatched her plump handand proceeded to kiss it.
"Dear friend!" she said in a voice breaking with emotion. "You ought notto give way to grief. Your sorrow is a great one, but you ought to findconsolation."
"I am crushed, I am annihilated, I am no longer a man!" said AlexeyAlexandrovitch, letting go her hand, but still gazing into her brimmingeyes. "My position is so awful because I can find nowhere, I cannot findwithin me strength to support me."
"You will find support; seek it—not in me, though I beseech you tobelieve in my friendship," she said, with a sigh. "Our support is love,that love that He has vouchsafed us. His burden is light," she said,with the look of ecstasy Alexey Alexandrovitch knew so well. "He will beyour support and your succor."
Although there was in these words a flavor of that sentimental emotionat her own lofty feelings, and that new mystical fervor which had latelygained ground in Petersburg, and which seemed to Alexey Alexandrovitchdisproportionate, still it was pleasant to him to hear this now.
"I am weak. I am crushed. I foresaw nothing, and now I understandnothing."
"Dear friend," repeated Lidia Ivanovna.
"It’s not the loss of what I have not now, it’s not that!" pursuedAlexey Alexandrovitch. "I do not grieve for that. But I cannot helpfeeling humiliated before other people for the position I am placed in.It is wrong, but I can’t help it, I can’t help it."
"Not you it was performed that noble act of forgiveness, at which I wasmoved to ecstasy, and everyone else too, but He, working within yourheart," said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, raising her eyes rapturously, "andso you cannot be ashamed of your act."
Alexey Alexandrovitch knitted his brows, and crooking his hands, hecracked his fingers.
"One must know all the facts," he said in his thin voice. "A man’sstrength has its limits, countess, and I have reached my limits. Thewhole day I have had to be making arrangements, arrangements abouthousehold matters arising" (he emphasized the word _arising_) "from mynew, solitary position. The servants, the governess, the accounts....These pinpricks have stabbed me to the heart, and I have not thestrength to bear it. At dinner ... yesterday, I was almost getting upfrom the dinner table. I could not bear the way my son looked at me. Hedid not ask me the meaning of it all, but he wanted to ask, and I couldnot bear the look in his eyes. He was afraid to look at me, but that isnot all...." Alexey Alexandrovitch would have referred to the bill thathad been brought him, but his voice shook, and he stopped. That bill onblue paper, for a hat and ribbons, he could not recall without a rush ofself-pity.
"I understand, dear friend," said Lidia Ivanovna. "I understand it all.Succor and comfort you will find not in me, though I have come only toaid you if I can. If I could take from off you all these petty,humiliating cares ... I understand that a woman’s word, a woman’ssuperintendence is needed. You will intrust it to me?"
Silently and gratefully Alexey Alexandrovitch pressed her hand.
"Together we will take care of Seryozha. Practical affairs are not mystrong point. But I will set to work. I will be your housekeeper. Don’tthank me. I do it not from myself..."
"I cannot help thanking you."
"But, dear friend, do not give way to the feeling of which youspoke—being ashamed of what is the Christian’s highest glory: _he whohumbles himself shall be exalted_. And you cannot thank me. You mustthank Him, and pray to Him for succor. In Him alone we find peace,consolation, salvation, and love," she said, and turning her eyesheavenwards, she began praying, as Alexey Alexandrovitch gathered fromher silence.
Alexey Alexandrovitch listened to her now, and those expressions whichhad seemed to him, if not distasteful, at least exaggerated, now seemedto him natural and consolatory. Alexey Alexandrovitch had disliked thisnew enthusiastic fervor. He was a believer, who was interested inreligion primarily in its political aspect, and the new doctrine whichventured upon several new interpretations, just because it paved the wayto discussion and analysis, was in principle disagreeable to him. He hadhitherto taken up a cold and even antagonistic attitude to this newdoctrine, and with Countess Lidia Ivanovna, who had been carried away byit, he had never argued, but by silence had assiduously parried herattempts to provoke him into argument. Now for the first time he heardher words with pleasure, and did not inwardly oppose them.
"I am very, very grateful to you, both for your deeds and for yourwords," he said, when she had finished praying.
Countess Lidia Ivanovna once more pressed both her friend’s hands.
"Now I will enter upon my duties," she said with a smile after a pause,as she wiped away the traces of tears. "I am going to Seryozha. Only inthe last extremity shall I apply to you." And she got up and went out.
Countess Lidia Ivanovna went into Seryozha’s part of the house, anddropping tears on the scared child’s cheeks, she told him that hisfather was a saint and his mother was dead.
Countess Lidia Ivanovna kept her promise. She did actually take uponherself the care of the organization and management of AlexeyAlexandrovitch’s household. But she had not overstated the case whensaying that practical affairs were not her strong point. All herarrangements had to be modified because they could not be carried out,and they were modified by Korney, Alexey Alexandrovitch’s valet, who,though no one was aware of the fact, now managed Karenin’s household,and quietly and discreetly reported to his master while he was dressingall it was necessary for him to know. But Lidia Ivanovna’s help was nonethe less real; she gave Alexey Alexandrovitch moral support in theconsciousness of her love and respect for him, and still more, as it wassoothing to her to believe, in that she almost turned him toChristianity—that is, from an indifferent and apathetic believer sheturned him into an ardent and steadfast adherent of the newinterpretation of Christian doctrine, which had been gaining ground oflate in Petersburg. It was easy for Alexey Alexandrovitch to believe inthis teaching. Alexey Alexandrovitch, like Lidia Ivanovna indeed, andothers who shared their views, was completely devoid of vividness ofimagination, that spiritual faculty in virtue of which the conceptionsevoked by the imagination become so vivid that they must needs be inharmony with other conceptions, and with actual fact. He saw nothingimpossible and inconceivable in the idea that death, though existing forunbelievers, did not exist for him, and that, as he was possessed of themost perfect faith, of the measure of which he was himself the judge,therefore there was no sin in his soul, and he was experiencing completesalvation here on earth.
It is true that the erroneousness and shallowness of this conception ofhis faith was dimly perceptible to Alexey Alexandrovitch, and he knewthat when, without the slightest idea that his forgiveness was theaction of a higher power, he had surrendered directly to the feeling offorgiveness, he had felt more happiness than now when he was thinkingevery instant that Christ was in his heart, and that in signing officialpapers he was doing His will. But for Alexey Alexandrovitch it was anecessity to think in that way; it was such a necessity for him in hishumiliation to have some elevated standpoint, however imaginary, fromwhich, looked down upon by all, he could look down on others, that heclung, as to his one salvation, to his delusion of salvation.


Chapter 23

The Countess Lidia Ivanovna had, as a very young and sentimental girl,been married to a wealthy man of high rank, an extremely good-natured,jovial, and extremely dissipated rake. Two months after marriage herhusband abandoned her, and her impassioned protestations of affection hemet with a sarcasm and even hostility that people knowing the count’sgood heart, and seeing no defects in the sentimental Lidia, were at aloss to explain. Though they were divorced and lived apart, yet wheneverthe husband met the wife, he invariably behaved to her with the samemalignant irony, the cause of which was incomprehensible.
Countess Lidia Ivanovna had long given up being in love with herhusband, but from that time she had never given up being in love withsomeone. She was in love with several people at once, both men andwomen; she had been in love with almost everyone who had beenparticularly distinguished in any way. She was in love with all the newprinces and princesses who married into the imperial family; she hadbeen in love with a high dignitary of the Church, a vicar, and a parishpriest; she had been in love with a journalist, three Slavophiles, withKomissarov, with a minister, a doctor, an English missionary andKarenin. All these passions constantly waning or growing more ardent,did not prevent her from keeping up the most extended and complicatedrelations with the court and fashionable society. But from the time thatafter Karenin’s trouble she took him under her special protection, fromthe time that she set to work in Karenin’s household looking after hiswelfare, she felt that all her other attachments were not the realthing, and that she was now genuinely in love, and with no one butKarenin. The feeling she now experienced for him seemed to her strongerthan any of her former feelings. Analyzing her feeling, and comparing itwith former passions, she distinctly perceived that she would not havebeen in love with Komissarov if he had not saved the life of the Tsar,that she would not have been in love with Ristitch-Kudzhitsky if therehad been no Slavonic question, but that she loved Karenin for himself,for his lofty, uncomprehended soul, for the sweet—to her—high notes ofhis voice, for his drawling intonation, his weary eyes, his character,and his soft white hands with their swollen veins. She was not simplyoverjoyed at meeting him, but she sought in his face signs of theimpression she was making on him. She tried to please him, not by herwords only, but in her whole person. For his sake it was that she nowlavished more care on her dress than before. She caught herself inreveries on what might have been, if she had not been married and he hadbeen free. She blushed with emotion when he came into the room, shecould not repress a smile of rapture when he said anything amiable toher.
For several days now Countess Lidia Ivanovna had been in a state ofintense excitement. She had learned that Anna and Vronsky were inPetersburg. Alexey Alexandrovitch must be saved from seeing her, he mustbe saved even from the torturing knowledge that that awful woman was inthe same town with him, and that he might meet her any minute.
Lidia Ivanovna made inquiries through her friends as to what those_infamous people_, as she called Anna and Vronsky, intended doing, andshe endeavored so to guide every movement of her friend during thosedays that he could not come across them. The young adjutant, anacquaintance of Vronsky, through whom she obtained her information, andwho hoped through Countess Lidia Ivanovna to obtain a concession, toldher that they had finished their business and were going away next day.Lidia Ivanovna had already begun to calm down, when the next morning anote was brought her, the handwriting of which she recognized withhorror. It was the handwriting of Anna Karenina. The envelope was ofpaper as thick as bark; on the oblong yellow paper there was a hugemonogram, and the letter smelt of agreeable scent.
"Who brought it?"
"A commissionaire from the hotel."
It was some time before Countess Lidia Ivanovna could sit down to readthe letter. Her excitement brought on an attack of asthma, to which shewas subject. When she had recovered her composure, she read thefollowing letter in French:
    "Madame la Comtesse,
    "The Christian feelings with which your heart is filled give me    the, I feel, unpardonable boldness to write to you. I am    miserable at being separated from my son. I entreat permission    to see him once before my departure. Forgive me for recalling    myself to your memory. I apply to you and not to Alexey    Alexandrovitch, simply because I do not wish to cause that    generous man to suffer in remembering me. Knowing your    friendship for him, I know you will understand me. Could you    send Seryozha to me, or should I come to the house at some fixed    hour, or will you let me know when and where I could see him    away from home? I do not anticipate a refusal, knowing the    magnanimity of him with whom it rests. You cannot conceive the    craving I have to see him, and so cannot conceive the gratitude    your help will arouse in me.
                                                               Anna"
Everything in this letter exasperated Countess Lidia Ivanovna: itscontents and the allusion to magnanimity, and especially its free andeasy—as she considered—tone.
"Say that there is no answer," said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, andimmediately opening her blotting-book, she wrote to AlexeyAlexandrovitch that she hoped to see him at one o’clock at the levee.
"I must talk with you of a grave and painful subject. There we willarrange where to meet. Best of all at my house, where I will order tea_as you like it_. Urgent. He lays the cross, but He gives the strengthto bear it," she added, so as to give him some slight preparation.Countess Lidia Ivanovna usually wrote some two or three letters a day toAlexey Alexandrovitch. She enjoyed that form of communication, whichgave opportunity for a refinement and air of mystery not afforded bytheir personal interviews.


Chapter 24

The levee was drawing to a close. People met as they were going away,and gossiped of the latest news, of the newly bestowed honors and thechanges in the positions of the higher functionaries.
"If only Countess Marya Borissovna were Minister of War, and PrincessVatkovskaya were Commander-in-Chief," said a gray-headed, little old manin a gold-embroidered uniform, addressing a tall, handsome maid of honorwho had questioned him about the new appointments.
"And me among the adjutants," said the maid of honor, smiling.
"You have an appointment already. You’re over the ecclesiasticaldepartment. And your assistant’s Karenin."
"Good-day, prince!" said the little old man to a man who came up to him.
"What were you saying of Karenin?" said the prince.
"He and Putyatov have received the Alexander Nevsky."
"I thought he had it already."
"No. Just look at him," said the little old man, pointing with hisembroidered hat to Karenin in a court uniform with the new red ribbonacross his shoulders, standing in the doorway of the hall with aninfluential member of the Imperial Council. "Pleased and happy as abrass farthing," he added, stopping to shake hands with a handsomegentleman of the bedchamber of colossal proportions.
"No; he’s looking older," said the gentleman of the bedchamber.
"From overwork. He’s always drawing up projects nowadays. He won’t let apoor devil go nowadays till he’s explained it all to him under heads."
"Looking older, did you say? _Il fait des passions_. I believe CountessLidia Ivanovna’s jealous now of his wife."
"Oh, come now, please don’t say any harm of Countess Lidia Ivanovna."
"Why, is there any harm in her being in love with Karenin?"
"But is it true Madame Karenina’s here?"
"Well, not here in the palace, but in Petersburg. I met her yesterdaywith Alexey Vronsky, _bras dessous, bras dessous_, in the Morsky."
"C’est un homme qui n’a pas..." the gentleman of the bedchamber wasbeginning, but he stopped to make room, bowing, for a member of theImperial family to pass.
Thus people talked incessantly of Alexey Alexandrovitch, finding faultwith him and laughing at him, while he, blocking up the way of themember of the Imperial Council he had captured, was explaining to himpoint by point his new financial project, never interrupting hisdiscourse for an instant for fear he should escape.
Almost at the same time that his wife left Alexey Alexandrovitch therehad come to him that bitterest moment in the life of an official—themoment when his upward career comes to a full stop. This full stop hadarrived and everyone perceived it, but Alexey Alexandrovitch himself wasnot yet aware that his career was over. Whether it was due to his feudwith Stremov, or his misfortune with his wife, or simply that AlexeyAlexandrovitch had reached his destined limits, it had become evident toeveryone in the course of that year that his career was at an end. Hestill filled a position of consequence, he sat on many commissions andcommittees, but he was a man whose day was over, and from whom nothingwas expected. Whatever he said, whatever he proposed, was heard asthough it were something long familiar, and the very thing that was notneeded. But Alexey Alexandrovitch was not aware of this, and, on thecontrary, being cut off from direct participation in governmentalactivity, he saw more clearly than ever the errors and defects in theaction of others, and thought it his duty to point out means for theircorrection. Shortly after his separation from his wife, he began writinghis first note on the new judicial procedure, the first of the endlessseries of notes he was destined to write in the future.
Alexey Alexandrovitch did not merely fail to observe his hopelessposition in the official world, he was not merely free from anxiety onthis head, he was positively more satisfied than ever with his ownactivity.
"He that is unmarried careth for the things that belong to the Lord, howhe may please the Lord: But he that is married careth for the thingsthat are of the world, how he may please his wife," says the ApostlePaul, and Alexey Alexandrovitch, who was now guided in every action byScripture, often recalled this text. It seemed to him that ever since hehad been left without a wife, he had in these very projects of reformbeen serving the Lord more zealously than before.
The unmistakable impatience of the member of the Council trying to getaway from him did not trouble Alexey Alexandrovitch; he gave up hisexposition only when the member of the Council, seizing his chance whenone of the Imperial family was passing, slipped away from him.
Left alone, Alexey Alexandrovitch looked down, collecting his thoughts,then looked casually about him and walked towards the door, where hehoped to meet Countess Lidia Ivanovna.
"And how strong they all are, how sound physically," thought AlexeyAlexandrovitch, looking at the powerfully built gentleman of thebedchamber with his well-combed, perfumed whiskers, and at the red neckof the prince, pinched by his tight uniform. He had to pass them on hisway. "Truly is it said that all the world is evil," he thought, withanother sidelong glance at the calves of the gentleman of thebedchamber.
Moving forward deliberately, Alexey Alexandrovitch bowed with hiscustomary air of weariness and dignity to the gentleman who had beentalking about him, and looking towards the door, his eyes soughtCountess Lidia Ivanovna.
"Ah! Alexey Alexandrovitch!" said the little old man, with a maliciouslight in his eyes, at the moment when Karenin was on a level with them,and was nodding with a frigid gesture, "I haven’t congratulated youyet," said the old man, pointing to his newly received ribbon.
"Thank you," answered Alexey Alexandrovitch. "What an _exquisite_ daytoday," he added, laying emphasis in his peculiar way on the word_exquisite_.
That they laughed at him he was well aware, but he did not expectanything but hostility from them; he was used to that by now.
Catching sight of the yellow shoulders of Lidia Ivanovna jutting outabove her corset, and her fine pensive eyes bidding him to her, AlexeyAlexandrovitch smiled, revealing untarnished white teeth, and wenttowards her.
Lidia Ivanovna’s dress had cost her great pains, as indeed all herdresses had done of late. Her aim in dress was now quite the reverse ofthat she had pursued thirty years before. Then her desire had been toadorn herself with something, and the more adorned the better. Now, onthe contrary, she was perforce decked out in a way so inconsistent withher age and her figure, that her one anxiety was to contrive that thecontrast between these adornments and her own exterior should not be tooappalling. And as far as Alexey Alexandrovitch was concerned shesucceeded, and was in his eyes attractive. For him she was the oneisland not only of goodwill to him, but of love in the midst of the seaof hostility and jeering that surrounded him.
Passing through rows of ironical eyes, he was drawn as naturally to herloving glance as a plant to the sun.
"I congratulate you," she said to him, her eyes on his ribbon.
Suppressing a smile of pleasure, he shrugged his shoulders, closing hiseyes, as though to say that that could not be a source of joy to him.Countess Lidia Ivanovna was very well aware that it was one of his chiefsources of satisfaction, though he never admitted it.
"How is our angel?" said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, meaning Seryozha.
"I can’t say I was quite pleased with him," said Alexey Alexandrovitch,raising his eyebrows and opening his eyes. "And Sitnikov is notsatisfied with him." (Sitnikov was the tutor to whom Seryozha’s seculareducation had been intrusted.) "As I have mentioned to you, there’s asort of coldness in him towards the most important questions which oughtto touch the heart of every man and every child...." AlexeyAlexandrovitch began expounding his views on the sole question thatinterested him besides the service—the education of his son.
When Alexey Alexandrovitch with Lidia Ivanovna’s help had been broughtback anew to life and activity, he felt it his duty to undertake theeducation of the son left on his hands. Having never before taken anyinterest in educational questions, Alexey Alexandrovitch devoted sometime to the theoretical study of the subject. After reading severalbooks on anthropology, education, and didactics, Alexey Alexandrovitchdrew up a plan of education, and engaging the best tutor in Petersburgto superintend it, he set to work, and the subject continually absorbedhim.
"Yes, but the heart. I see in him his father’s heart, and with such aheart a child cannot go far wrong," said Lidia Ivanovna with enthusiasm.
"Yes, perhaps.... As for me, I do my duty. It’s all I can do."
"You’re coming to me," said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, after a pause; "wehave to speak of a subject painful for you. I would give anything tohave spared you certain memories, but others are not of the same mind. Ihave received a letter from _her_. _She_ is here in Petersburg."
Alexey Alexandrovitch shuddered at the allusion to his wife, butimmediately his face assumed the deathlike rigidity which expressedutter helplessness in the matter.
"I was expecting it," he said.
Countess Lidia Ivanovna looked at him ecstatically, and tears of raptureat the greatness of his soul came into her eyes.


Chapter 25

When Alexey Alexandrovitch came into the Countess Lidia Ivanovna’s snuglittle boudoir, decorated with old china and hung with portraits, thelady herself had not yet made her appearance.
She was changing her dress.
A cloth was laid on a round table, and on it stood a china tea serviceand a silver spirit-lamp and tea kettle. Alexey Alexandrovitch lookedidly about at the endless familiar portraits which adorned the room, andsitting down to the table, he opened a New Testament lying upon it. Therustle of the countess’s silk skirt drew his attention off.
"Well now, we can sit quietly," said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, slippinghurriedly with an agitated smile between the table and the sofa, "andtalk over our tea."
After some words of preparation, Countess Lidia Ivanovna, breathing hardand flushing crimson, gave into Alexey Alexandrovitch’s hands the lettershe had received.
After reading the letter, he sat a long while in silence.
"I don’t think I have the right to refuse her," he said, timidly liftinghis eyes.
"Dear friend, you never see evil in anyone!"
"On the contrary, I see that all is evil. But whether it is just..."
His face showed irresolution, and a seeking for counsel, support, andguidance in a matter he did not understand.
"No," Countess Lidia Ivanovna interrupted him; "there are limits toeverything. I can understand immorality," she said, not quitetruthfully, since she never could understand that which leads women toimmorality; "but I don’t understand cruelty: to whom? to you! How canshe stay in the town where you are? No, the longer one lives the moreone learns. And I’m learning to understand your loftiness and herbaseness."
"Who is to throw a stone?" said Alexey Alexandrovitch, unmistakablypleased with the part he had to play. "I have forgiven all, and so Icannot deprive her of what is exacted by love in her—by her love for herson...."
"But is that love, my friend? Is it sincere? Admitting that you haveforgiven—that you forgive—have we the right to work on the feelings ofthat angel? He looks on her as dead. He prays for her, and beseeches Godto have mercy on her sins. And it is better so. But now what will hethink?"
"I had not thought of that," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, evidentlyagreeing.
Countess Lidia Ivanovna hid her face in her hands and was silent. Shewas praying.
"If you ask my advice," she said, having finished her prayer anduncovered her face, "I do not advise you to do this. Do you suppose Idon’t see how you are suffering, how this has torn open your wounds? Butsupposing that, as always, you don’t think of yourself, what can it leadto?—to fresh suffering for you, to torture for the child. If there werea trace of humanity left in her, she ought not to wish for it herself.No, I have no hesitation in saying I advise not, and if you will intrustit to me, I will write to her."
And Alexey Alexandrovitch consented, and Countess Lidia Ivanovna sentthe following letter in French:
    "Dear Madame,
    "To be reminded of you might have results for your son in    leading to questions on his part which could not be answered    without implanting in the child’s soul a spirit of censure    towards what should be for him sacred, and therefore I beg you    to interpret your husband’s refusal in the spirit of Christian    love. I pray to Almighty God to have mercy on you.
                                                     Countess Lidia"
This letter attained the secret object which Countess Lidia Ivanovna hadconcealed from herself. It wounded Anna to the quick.
For his part, Alexey Alexandrovitch, on returning home from LidiaIvanovna’s, could not all that day concentrate himself on his usualpursuits, and find that spiritual peace of one saved and believing whichhe had felt of late.
The thought of his wife, who had so greatly sinned against him, andtowards whom he had been so saintly, as Countess Lidia Ivanovna had sojustly told him, ought not to have troubled him; but he was not easy; hecould not understand the book he was reading; he could not drive awayharassing recollections of his relations with her, of the mistake which,as it now seemed, he had made in regard to her. The memory of how he hadreceived her confession of infidelity on their way home from the races(especially that he had insisted only on the observance of externaldecorum, and had not sent a challenge) tortured him like a remorse. Hewas tortured too by the thought of the letter he had written her; andmost of all, his forgiveness, which nobody wanted, and his care of theother man’s child made his heart burn with shame and remorse.
And just the same feeling of shame and regret he felt now, as hereviewed all his past with her, recalling the awkward words in which,after long wavering, he had made her an offer.
"But how have I been to blame?" he said to himself. And this questionalways excited another question in him—whether they felt differently,did their loving and marrying differently, these Vronskys and Oblonskys... these gentlemen of the bedchamber, with their fine calves. And therepassed before his mind a whole series of these mettlesome, vigorous,self-confident men, who always and everywhere drew his inquisitiveattention in spite of himself. He tried to dispel these thoughts, hetried to persuade himself that he was not living for this transientlife, but for the life of eternity, and that there was peace and love inhis heart.
But the fact that he had in this transient, trivial life made, as itseemed to him, a few trivial mistakes tortured him as though the eternalsalvation in which he believed had no existence. But this temptation didnot last long, and soon there was reestablished once more in AlexeyAlexandrovitch’s soul the peace and the elevation by virtue of which hecould forget what he did not want to remember.


Chapter 26

"Well, Kapitonitch?" said Seryozha, coming back rosy and good-humoredfrom his walk the day before his birthday, and giving his overcoat tothe tall old hall porter, who smiled down at the little person from theheight of his long figure. "Well, has the bandaged clerk been heretoday? Did papa see him?"
"He saw him. The minute the chief secretary came out, I announced him,"said the hall porter with a good-humored wink. "Here, I’ll take it off."
"Seryozha!" said the tutor, stopping in the doorway leading to the innerrooms. "Take it off yourself." But Seryozha, though he heard his tutor’sfeeble voice, did not pay attention to it. He stood keeping hold of thehall porter’s belt, and gazing into his face.
"Well, and did papa do what he wanted for him?"
The hall porter nodded his head affirmatively. The clerk with his facetied up, who had already been seven times to ask some favor of AlexeyAlexandrovitch, interested both Seryozha and the hall porter. Seryozhahad come upon him in the hall, and had heard him plaintively beg thehall porter to announce him, saying that he and his children had deathstaring them in the face.
Since then Seryozha, having met him a second time in the hall, tookgreat interest in him.
"Well, was he very glad?" he asked.
"Glad? I should think so! Almost dancing as he walked away."
"And has anything been left?" asked Seryozha, after a pause.
"Come, sir," said the hall-porter; then with a shake of his head hewhispered, "Something from the countess."
Seryozha understood at once that what the hall porter was speaking ofwas a present from Countess Lidia Ivanovna for his birthday.
"What do you say? Where?"
"Korney took it to your papa. A fine plaything it must be too!"
"How big? Like this?"
"Rather small, but a fine thing."
"A book."
"No, a thing. Run along, run along, Vassily Lukitch is calling you,"said the porter, hearing the tutor’s steps approaching, and carefullytaking away from his belt the little hand in the glove half pulled off,he signed with his head towards the tutor.
"Vassily Lukitch, in a tiny minute!" answered Seryozha with that gay andloving smile which always won over the conscientious Vassily Lukitch.
Seryozha was too happy, everything was too delightful for him to be ableto help sharing with his friend the porter the family good fortune ofwhich he had heard during his walk in the public gardens from LidiaIvanovna’s niece. This piece of good news seemed to him particularlyimportant from its coming at the same time with the gladness of thebandaged clerk and his own gladness at toys having come for him. Itseemed to Seryozha that this was a day on which everyone ought to beglad and happy.
"You know papa’s received the Alexander Nevsky today?"
"To be sure I do! People have been already to congratulate him."
"And is he glad?"
"Glad at the Tsar’s gracious favor! I should think so! It’s a proof he’sdeserved it," said the porter severely and seriously.
Seryozha fell to dreaming, gazing up at the face of the porter, which hehad thoroughly studied in every detail, especially the chin that hungdown between the gray whiskers, never seen by anyone but Seryozha, whosaw him only from below.
"Well, and has your daughter been to see you lately?"
The porter’s daughter was a ballet dancer.
"When is she to come on week-days? They’ve their lessons to learn too.And you’ve your lesson, sir; run along."
On coming into the room, Seryozha, instead of sitting down to hislessons, told his tutor of his supposition that what had been broughthim must be a machine. "What do you think?" he inquired.
But Vassily Lukitch was thinking of nothing but the necessity oflearning the grammar lesson for the teacher, who was coming at two.
"No, do just tell me, Vassily Lukitch," he asked suddenly, when he wasseated at their work table with the book in his hands, "what is greaterthan the Alexander Nevsky? You know papa’s received the AlexanderNevsky?"
Vassily Lukitch replied that the Vladimir was greater than the AlexanderNevsky.
"And higher still?"
"Well, highest of all is the Andrey Pervozvanny."
"And higher than the Andrey?"
"I don’t know."
"What, you don’t know?" and Seryozha, leaning on his elbows, sank intodeep meditation.
His meditations were of the most complex and diverse character. Heimagined his father’s having suddenly been presented with both theVladimir and the Andrey today, and in consequence being much bettertempered at his lesson, and dreamed how, when he was grown up, he wouldhimself receive all the orders, and what they might invent higher thanthe Andrey. Directly any higher order were invented, he would win it.They would make a higher one still, and he would immediately win thattoo.
The time passed in such meditations, and when the teacher came, thelesson about the adverbs of place and time and manner of action was notready, and the teacher was not only displeased, but hurt. This touchedSeryozha. He felt he was not to blame for not having learned the lesson;however much he tried, he was utterly unable to do that. As long as theteacher was explaining to him, he believed him and seemed to comprehend,but as soon as he was left alone, he was positively unable to recollectand to understand that the short and familiar word "suddenly" is anadverb of manner of action. Still he was sorry that he had disappointedthe teacher.
He chose a moment when the teacher was looking in silence at the book.
"Mihail Ivanitch, when is your birthday?" he asked all, of a sudden.
"You’d much better be thinking about your work. Birthdays are of noimportance to a rational being. It’s a day like any other on which onehas to do one’s work."
Seryozha looked intently at the teacher, at his scanty beard, at hisspectacles, which had slipped down below the ridge on his nose, and fellinto so deep a reverie that he heard nothing of what the teacher wasexplaining to him. He knew that the teacher did not think what he said;he felt it from the tone in which it was said. "But why have they allagreed to speak just in the same manner always the dreariest and mostuseless stuff? Why does he keep me off; why doesn’t he love me?" heasked himself mournfully, and could not think of an answer.


Chapter 27

After the lesson with the grammar teacher came his father’s lesson.While waiting for his father, Seryozha sat at the table playing with apenknife, and fell to dreaming. Among Seryozha’s favorite occupationswas searching for his mother during his walks. He did not believe indeath generally, and in her death in particular, in spite of what LidiaIvanovna had told him and his father had confirmed, and it was justbecause of that, and after he had been told she was dead, that he hadbegun looking for her when out for a walk. Every woman of full, gracefulfigure with dark hair was his mother. At the sight of such a woman sucha feeling of tenderness was stirred within him that his breath failedhim, and tears came into his eyes. And he was on the tiptoe ofexpectation that she would come up to him, would lift her veil. All herface would be visible, she would smile, she would hug him, he wouldsniff her fragrance, feel the softness of her arms, and cry withhappiness, just as he had one evening lain on her lap while she tickledhim, and he laughed and bit her white, ring-covered fingers. Later, whenhe accidentally learned from his old nurse that his mother was not dead,and his father and Lidia Ivanovna had explained to him that she was deadto him because she was wicked (which he could not possibly believe,because he loved her), he went on seeking her and expecting her in thesame way. That day in the public gardens there had been a lady in alilac veil, whom he had watched with a throbbing heart, believing it tobe she as she came towards them along the path. The lady had not come upto them, but had disappeared somewhere. That day, more intensely thanever, Seryozha felt a rush of love for her, and now, waiting for hisfather, he forgot everything, and cut all round the edge of the tablewith his penknife, staring straight before him with sparkling eyes anddreaming of her.
"Here is your papa!" said Vassily Lukitch, rousing him.
Seryozha jumped up and went up to his father, and kissing his hand,looked at him intently, trying to discover signs of his joy at receivingthe Alexander Nevsky.
"Did you have a nice walk?" said Alexey Alexandrovitch, sitting down inhis easy chair, pulling the volume of the Old Testament to him andopening it. Although Alexey Alexandrovitch had more than once toldSeryozha that every Christian ought to know Scripture historythoroughly, he often referred to the Bible himself during the lesson,and Seryozha observed this.
"Yes, it was very nice indeed, papa," said Seryozha, sitting sideways onhis chair and rocking it, which was forbidden. "I saw Nadinka" (Nadinkawas a niece of Lidia Ivanovna’s who was being brought up in her house)."She told me you’d been given a new star. Are you glad, papa?"
"First of all, don’t rock your chair, please," said AlexeyAlexandrovitch. "And secondly, it’s not the reward that’s precious, butthe work itself. And I could have wished you understood that. If you noware going to work, to study in order to win a reward, then the work willseem hard to you; but when you work" (Alexey Alexandrovitch, as hespoke, thought of how he had been sustained by a sense of duty throughthe wearisome labor of the morning, consisting of signing one hundredand eighty papers), "loving your work, you will find your reward in it."
Seryozha’s eyes, that had been shining with gaiety and tenderness, grewdull and dropped before his father’s gaze. This was the samelong-familiar tone his father always took with him, and Seryozha hadlearned by now to fall in with it. His father always talked to him—soSeryozha felt—as though he were addressing some boy of his ownimagination, one of those boys that exist in books, utterly unlikehimself. And Seryozha always tried with his father to act being thestory-book boy.
"You understand that, I hope?" said his father.
"Yes, papa," answered Seryozha, acting the part of the imaginary boy.
The lesson consisted of learning by heart several verses out of theGospel and the repetition of the beginning of the Old Testament. Theverses from the Gospel Seryozha knew fairly well, but at the moment whenhe was saying them he became so absorbed in watching the sharplyprotruding, bony knobbiness of his father’s forehead, that he lost thethread, and he transposed the end of one verse and the beginning ofanother. So it was evident to Alexey Alexandrovitch that he did notunderstand what he was saying, and that irritated him.
He frowned, and began explaining what Seryozha had heard many timesbefore and never could remember, because he understood it too well, justas that "suddenly" is an adverb of manner of action. Seryozha lookedwith scared eyes at his father, and could think of nothing but whetherhis father would make him repeat what he had said, as he sometimes did.And this thought so alarmed Seryozha that he now understood nothing. Buthis father did not make him repeat it, and passed on to the lesson outof the Old Testament. Seryozha recounted the events themselves wellenough, but when he had to answer questions as to what certain eventsprefigured, he knew nothing, though he had already been punished overthis lesson. The passage at which he was utterly unable to say anything,and began fidgeting and cutting the table and swinging his chair, waswhere he had to repeat the patriarchs before the Flood. He did not knowone of them, except Enoch, who had been taken up alive to heaven. Lasttime he had remembered their names, but now he had forgotten themutterly, chiefly because Enoch was the personage he liked best in thewhole of the Old Testament, and Enoch’s translation to heaven wasconnected in his mind with a whole long train of thought, in which hebecame absorbed now while he gazed with fascinated eyes at his father’swatch-chain and a half-unbuttoned button on his waistcoat.
In death, of which they talked to him so often, Seryozha disbelievedentirely. He did not believe that those he loved could die, above allthat he himself would die. That was to him something utterlyinconceivable and impossible. But he had been told that all men die; hehad asked people, indeed, whom he trusted, and they too, had confirmedit; his old nurse, too, said the same, though reluctantly. But Enoch hadnot died, and so it followed that everyone did not die. "And why cannotanyone else so serve God and be taken alive to heaven?" thoughtSeryozha. Bad people, that is those Seryozha did not like, they mightdie, but the good might all be like Enoch.
"Well, what are the names of the patriarchs?"
"Enoch, Enos—"
"But you have said that already. This is bad, Seryozha, very bad. If youdon’t try to learn what is more necessary than anything for aChristian," said his father, getting up, "whatever can interest you? Iam displeased with you, and Piotr Ignatitch" (this was the mostimportant of his teachers) "is displeased with you.... I shall have topunish you."
His father and his teacher were both displeased with Seryozha, and hecertainly did learn his lessons very badly. But still it could not besaid he was a stupid boy. On the contrary, he was far cleverer than theboys his teacher held up as examples to Seryozha. In his father’sopinion, he did not want to learn what he was taught. In reality hecould not learn that. He could not, because the claims of his own soulwere more binding on him than those claims his father and his teachermade upon him. Those claims were in opposition, and he was in directconflict with his education. He was nine years old; he was a child; buthe knew his own soul, it was precious to him, he guarded it as theeyelid guards the eye, and without the key of love he let no one intohis soul. His teachers complained that he would not learn, while hissoul was brimming over with thirst for knowledge. And he learned fromKapitonitch, from his nurse, from Nadinka, from Vassily Lukitch, but notfrom his teachers. The spring his father and his teachers reckoned uponto turn their mill-wheels had long dried up at the source, but itswaters did their work in another channel.
His father punished Seryozha by not letting him go to see Nadinka, LidiaIvanovna’s niece; but this punishment turned out happily for Seryozha.Vassily Lukitch was in a good humor, and showed him how to makewindmills. The whole evening passed over this work and in dreaming howto make a windmill on which he could turn himself—clutching at the sailsor tying himself on and whirling round. Of his mother Seryozha did notthink all the evening, but when he had gone to bed, he suddenlyremembered her, and prayed in his own words that his mother tomorrow forhis birthday might leave off hiding herself and come to him.
"Vassily Lukitch, do you know what I prayed for tonight extra besidesthe regular things?"
"That you might learn your lessons better?"
"No."
"Toys?"
"No. You’ll never guess. A splendid thing; but it’s a secret! When itcomes to pass I’ll tell you. Can’t you guess!"
"No, I can’t guess. You tell me," said Vassily Lukitch with a smile,which was rare with him. "Come, lie down, I’m putting out the candle."
"Without the candle I can see better what I see and what I prayed for.There! I was almost telling the secret!" said Seryozha, laughing gaily.
When the candle was taken away, Seryozha heard and felt his mother. Shestood over him, and with loving eyes caressed him. But then camewindmills, a knife, everything began to be mixed up, and he fell asleep.


Chapter 28

On arriving in Petersburg, Vronsky and Anna stayed at one of the besthotels; Vronsky apart in a lower story, Anna above with her child, itsnurse, and her maid, in a large suite of four rooms.
On the day of his arrival Vronsky went to his brother’s. There he foundhis mother, who had come from Moscow on business. His mother andsister-in-law greeted him as usual: they asked him about his stayabroad, and talked of their common acquaintances, but did not let drop asingle word in allusion to his connection with Anna. His brother camethe next morning to see Vronsky, and of his own accord asked him abouther, and Alexey Vronsky told him directly that he looked upon hisconnection with Madame Karenina as marriage; that he hoped to arrange adivorce, and then to marry her, and until then he considered her as mucha wife as any other wife, and he begged him to tell their mother and hiswife so.
"If the world disapproves, I don’t care," said Vronsky; "but if myrelations want to be on terms of relationship with me, they will have tobe on the same terms with my wife."
The elder brother, who had always a respect for his younger brother’sjudgment, could not well tell whether he was right or not till the worldhad decided the question; for his part he had nothing against it, andwith Alexey he went up to see Anna.
Before his brother, as before everyone, Vronsky addressed Anna with acertain formality, treating her as he might a very intimate friend, butit was understood that his brother knew their real relations, and theytalked about Anna’s going to Vronsky’s estate.
In spite of all his social experience Vronsky was, in consequence of thenew position in which he was placed, laboring under a strangemisapprehension. One would have thought he must have understood thatsociety was closed for him and Anna; but now some vague ideas had sprungup in his brain that this was only the case in old-fashioned days, andthat now with the rapidity of modern progress (he had unconsciouslybecome by now a partisan of every sort of progress) the views of societyhad changed, and that the question whether they would be received insociety was not a foregone conclusion. "Of course," he thought, "shewould not be received at court, but intimate friends can and must lookat it in the proper light." One may sit for several hours at a stretchwith one’s legs crossed in the same position, if one knows that there’snothing to prevent one’s changing one’s position; but if a man knowsthat he must remain sitting so with crossed legs, then cramps come on,the legs begin to twitch and to strain towards the spot to which onewould like to draw them. This was what Vronsky was experiencing inregard to the world. Though at the bottom of his heart he knew that theworld was shut on them, he put it to the test whether the world had notchanged by now and would not receive them. But he very quickly perceivedthat though the world was open for him personally, it was closed forAnna. Just as in the game of cat and mouse, the hands raised for himwere dropped to bar the way for Anna.
One of the first ladies of Petersburg society whom Vronsky saw was hiscousin Betsy.
"At last!" she greeted him joyfully. "And Anna? How glad I am! Where areyou stopping? I can fancy after your delightful travels you must findour poor Petersburg horrid. I can fancy your honeymoon in Rome. Howabout the divorce? Is that all over?"
Vronsky noticed that Betsy’s enthusiasm waned when she learned that nodivorce had as yet taken place.
"People will throw stones at me, I know," she said, "but I shall comeand see Anna; yes, I shall certainly come. You won’t be here long, Isuppose?"
And she did certainly come to see Anna the same day, but her tone wasnot at all the same as in former days. She unmistakably prided herselfon her courage, and wished Anna to appreciate the fidelity of herfriendship. She only stayed ten minutes, talking of society gossip, andon leaving she said:
"You’ve never told me when the divorce is to be? Supposing I’m ready tofling my cap over the mill, other starchy people will give you the coldshoulder until you’re married. And that’s so simple nowadays. _Ça sefait_. So you’re going on Friday? Sorry we shan’t see each other again."
From Betsy’s tone Vronsky might have grasped what he had to expect fromthe world; but he made another effort in his own family. His mother hedid not reckon upon. He knew that his mother, who had been soenthusiastic over Anna at their first acquaintance, would have no mercyon her now for having ruined her son’s career. But he had more hope ofVarya, his brother’s wife. He fancied she would not throw stones, andwould go simply and directly to see Anna, and would receive her in herown house.
The day after his arrival Vronsky went to her, and finding her alone,expressed his wishes directly.
"You know, Alexey," she said after hearing him, "how fond I am of you,and how ready I am to do anything for you; but I have not spoken,because I knew I could be of no use to you and to Anna Arkadyevna," shesaid, articulating the name "Anna Arkadyevna" with particular care."Don’t suppose, please, that I judge her. Never; perhaps in her place Ishould have done the same. I don’t and can’t enter into that," she said,glancing timidly at his gloomy face. "But one must call things by theirnames. You want me to go and see her, to ask her here, and torehabilitate her in society; but do understand that I _cannot_ do so. Ihave daughters growing up, and I must live in the world for my husband’ssake. Well, I’m ready to come and see Anna Arkadyevna: she willunderstand that I can’t ask her here, or I should have to do so in sucha way that she would not meet people who look at things differently;that would offend her. I can’t raise her..."
"Oh, I don’t regard her as fallen more than hundreds of women you doreceive!" Vronsky interrupted her still more gloomily, and he got up insilence, understanding that his sister-in-law’s decision was not to beshaken.
"Alexey! don’t be angry with me. Please understand that I’m not toblame," began Varya, looking at him with a timid smile.
"I’m not angry with you," he said still as gloomily; "but I’m sorry intwo ways. I’m sorry, too, that this means breaking up our friendship—ifnot breaking up, at least weakening it. You will understand that for me,too, it cannot be otherwise."
And with that he left her.
Vronsky knew that further efforts were useless, and that he had to spendthese few days in Petersburg as though in a strange town, avoiding everysort of relation with his own old circle in order not to be exposed tothe annoyances and humiliations which were so intolerable to him. One ofthe most unpleasant features of his position in Petersburg was thatAlexey Alexandrovitch and his name seemed to meet him everywhere. Hecould not begin to talk of anything without the conversation turning onAlexey Alexandrovitch; he could not go anywhere without risk of meetinghim. So at least it seemed to Vronsky, just as it seems to a man with asore finger that he is continually, as though on purpose, grazing hissore finger on everything.
Their stay in Petersburg was the more painful to Vronsky that heperceived all the time a sort of new mood that he could not understandin Anna. At one time she would seem in love with him, and then she wouldbecome cold, irritable, and impenetrable. She was worrying oversomething, and keeping something back from him, and did not seem tonotice the humiliations which poisoned his existence, and for her, withher delicate intuition, must have been still more unbearable.


Chapter 29

One of Anna’s objects in coming back to Russia had been to see her son.From the day she left Italy the thought of it had never ceased toagitate her. And as she got nearer to Petersburg, the delight andimportance of this meeting grew ever greater in her imagination. She didnot even put to herself the question how to arrange it. It seemed to hernatural and simple to see her son when she should be in the same townwith him. But on her arrival in Petersburg she was suddenly madedistinctly aware of her present position in society, and she grasped thefact that to arrange this meeting was no easy matter.
She had now been two days in Petersburg. The thought of her son neverleft her for a single instant, but she had not yet seen him. To gostraight to the house, where she might meet Alexey Alexandrovitch, thatshe felt she had no right to do. She might be refused admittance andinsulted. To write and so enter into relations with her husband—that itmade her miserable to think of doing; she could only be at peace whenshe did not think of her husband. To get a glimpse of her son outwalking, finding out where and when he went out, was not enough for her;she had so looked forward to this meeting, she had so much she must sayto him, she so longed to embrace him, to kiss him. Seryozha’s old nursemight be a help to her and show her what to do. But the nurse was notnow living in Alexey Alexandrovitch’s house. In this uncertainty, and inefforts to find the nurse, two days had slipped by.
Hearing of the close intimacy between Alexey Alexandrovitch and CountessLidia Ivanovna, Anna decided on the third day to write to her a letter,which cost her great pains, and in which she intentionally said thatpermission to see her son must depend on her husband’s generosity. Sheknew that if the letter were shown to her husband, he would keep up hischaracter of magnanimity, and would not refuse her request.
The commissionaire who took the letter had brought her back the mostcruel and unexpected answer, that there was no answer. She had neverfelt so humiliated as at the moment when, sending for thecommissionaire, she heard from him the exact account of how he hadwaited, and how afterwards he had been told there was no answer. Annafelt humiliated, insulted, but she saw that from her point of viewCountess Lidia Ivanovna was right. Her suffering was the more poignantthat she had to bear it in solitude. She could not and would not shareit with Vronsky. She knew that to him, although he was the primary causeof her distress, the question of her seeing her son would seem a matterof very little consequence. She knew that he would never be capable ofunderstanding all the depth of her suffering, that for his cool tone atany allusion to it she would begin to hate him. And she dreaded thatmore than anything in the world, and so she hid from him everything thatrelated to her son. Spending the whole day at home she considered waysof seeing her son, and had reached a decision to write to her husband.She was just composing this letter when she was handed the letter fromLidia Ivanovna. The countess’s silence had subdued and depressed her,but the letter, all that she read between the lines in it, soexasperated her, this malice was so revolting beside her passionate,legitimate tenderness for her son, that she turned against other peopleand left off blaming herself.
"This coldness—this pretense of feeling!" she said to herself. "Theymust needs insult me and torture the child, and I am to submit to it!Not on any consideration! She is worse than I am. I don’t lie, anyway."And she decided on the spot that next day, Seryozha’s birthday, shewould go straight to her husband’s house, bribe or deceive the servants,but at any cost see her son and overturn the hideous deception withwhich they were encompassing the unhappy child.
She went to a toy shop, bought toys and thought over a plan of action.She would go early in the morning at eight o’clock, when AlexeyAlexandrovitch would be certain not to be up. She would have money inher hand to give the hall porter and the footman, so that they shouldlet her in, and not raising her veil, she would say that she had comefrom Seryozha’s godfather to congratulate him, and that she had beencharged to leave the toys at his bedside. She had prepared everythingbut the words she should say to her son. Often as she had dreamed of it,she could never think of anything.
The next day, at eight o’clock in the morning, Anna got out of a hiredsledge and rang at the front entrance of her former home.
"Run and see what’s wanted. Some lady," said Kapitonitch, who, not yetdressed, in his overcoat and galoshes, had peeped out of the window andseen a lady in a veil standing close up to the door. His assistant, alad Anna did not know, had no sooner opened the door to her than shecame in, and pulling a three-rouble note out of her muff put ithurriedly into his hand.
"Seryozha—Sergey Alexeitch," she said, and was going on. Scrutinizingthe note, the porter’s assistant stopped her at the second glass door.
"Whom do you want?" he asked.
She did not hear his words and made no answer.
Noticing the embarrassment of the unknown lady, Kapitonitch went out toher, opened the second door for her, and asked her what she was pleasedto want.
"From Prince Skorodumov for Sergey Alexeitch," she said.
"His honor’s not up yet," said the porter, looking at her attentively.
Anna had not anticipated that the absolutely unchanged hall of the housewhere she had lived for nine years would so greatly affect her. Memoriessweet and painful rose one after another in her heart, and for a momentshe forgot what she was here for.
"Would you kindly wait?" said Kapitonitch, taking off her fur cloak.
As he took off the cloak, Kapitonitch glanced at her face, recognizedher, and made her a low bow in silence.
"Please walk in, your excellency," he said to her.
She tried to say something, but her voice refused to utter any sound;with a guilty and imploring glance at the old man she went with light,swift steps up the stairs. Bent double, and his galoshes catching in thesteps, Kapitonitch ran after her, trying to overtake her.
"The tutor’s there; maybe he’s not dressed. I’ll let him know."
Anna still mounted the familiar staircase, not understanding what theold man was saying.
"This way, to the left, if you please. Excuse its not being tidy. Hishonor’s in the old parlor now," the hall porter said, panting. "Excuseme, wait a little, your excellency; I’ll just see," he said, andovertaking her, he opened the high door and disappeared behind it. Annastood still waiting. "He’s only just awake," said the hall porter,coming out. And at the very instant the porter said this, Anna caughtthe sound of a childish yawn. From the sound of this yawn alone she knewher son and seemed to see him living before her eyes.
"Let me in; go away!" she said, and went in through the high doorway. Onthe right of the door stood a bed, and sitting up in the bed was theboy. His little body bent forward with his nightshirt unbuttoned, he wasstretching and still yawning. The instant his lips came together theycurved into a blissfully sleepy smile, and with that smile he slowly anddeliciously rolled back again.
"Seryozha!" she whispered, going noiselessly up to him.
When she was parted from him, and all this latter time when she had beenfeeling a fresh rush of love for him, she had pictured him as he was atfour years old, when she had loved him most of all. Now he was not eventhe same as when she had left him; he was still further from thefour-year-old baby, more grown and thinner. How thin his face was, howshort his hair was! What long hands! How he had changed since she lefthim! But it was he with his head, his lips, his soft neck and broadlittle shoulders.
"Seryozha!" she repeated just in the child’s ear.
He raised himself again on his elbow, turned his tangled head from sideto side as though looking for something, and opened his eyes. Slowly andinquiringly he looked for several seconds at his mother standingmotionless before him, then all at once he smiled a blissful smile, andshutting his eyes, rolled not backwards but towards her into her arms.
"Seryozha! my darling boy!" she said, breathing hard and putting herarms round his plump little body. "Mother!" he said, wriggling about inher arms so as to touch her hands with different parts of him.
Smiling sleepily still with closed eyes, he flung fat little arms roundher shoulders, rolled towards her, with the delicious sleepy warmth andfragrance that is only found in children, and began rubbing his faceagainst her neck and shoulders.
"I know," he said, opening his eyes; "it’s my birthday today. I knewyou’d come. I’ll get up directly."
And saying that he dropped asleep.
Anna looked at him hungrily; she saw how he had grown and changed in herabsence. She knew, and did not know, the bare legs so long now, thatwere thrust out below the quilt, those short-cropped curls on his neckin which she had so often kissed him. She touched all this and could saynothing; tears choked her.
"What are you crying for, mother?" he said, waking completely up."Mother, what are you crying for?" he cried in a tearful voice.
"I won’t cry ... I’m crying for joy. It’s so long since I’ve seen you. Iwon’t, I won’t," she said, gulping down her tears and turning away."Come, it’s time for you to dress now," she added, after a pause, and,never letting go his hands, she sat down by his bedside on the chair,where his clothes were put ready for him.
"How do you dress without me? How..." she tried to begin talking simplyand cheerfully, but she could not, and again she turned away.
"I don’t have a cold bath, papa didn’t order it. And you’ve not seenVassily Lukitch? He’ll come in soon. Why, you’re sitting on my clothes!"
And Seryozha went off into a peal of laughter. She looked at him andsmiled.
"Mother, darling, sweet one!" he shouted, flinging himself on her againand hugging her. It was as though only now, on seeing her smile, hefully grasped what had happened.
"I don’t want that on," he said, taking off her hat. And as it were,seeing her afresh without her hat, he fell to kissing her again.
"But what did you think about me? You didn’t think I was dead?"
"I never believed it."
"You didn’t believe it, my sweet?"
"I knew, I knew!" he repeated his favorite phrase, and snatching thehand that was stroking his hair, he pressed the open palm to his mouthand kissed it.


Chapter 30

Meanwhile Vassily Lukitch had not at first understood who this lady was,and had learned from their conversation that it was no other person thanthe mother who had left her husband, and whom he had not seen, as he hadentered the house after her departure. He was in doubt whether to go inor not, or whether to communicate with Alexey Alexandrovitch. Reflectingfinally that his duty was to get Seryozha up at the hour fixed, and thatit was therefore not his business to consider who was there, the motheror anyone else, but simply to do his duty, he finished dressing, went tothe door and opened it.
But the embraces of the mother and child, the sound of their voices, andwhat they were saying, made him change his mind.
He shook his head, and with a sigh he closed the door. "I’ll waitanother ten minutes," he said to himself, clearing his throat and wipingaway tears.
Among the servants of the household there was intense excitement allthis time. All had heard that their mistress had come, and thatKapitonitch had let her in, and that she was even now in the nursery,and that their master always went in person to the nursery at nineo’clock, and every one fully comprehended that it was impossible for thehusband and wife to meet, and that they must prevent it. Korney, thevalet, going down to the hall porter’s room, asked who had let her in,and how it was he had done so, and ascertaining that Kapitonitch hadadmitted her and shown her up, he gave the old man a talking-to. Thehall porter was doggedly silent, but when Korney told him he ought to besent away, Kapitonitch darted up to him, and waving his hands inKorney’s face, began:
"Oh yes, to be sure you’d not have let her in! After ten years’ service,and never a word but of kindness, and there you’d up and say, ‘Be off,go along, get away with you!’ Oh yes, you’re a shrewd one at politics, Idare say! You don’t need to be taught how to swindle the master, and tofilch fur coats!"
"Soldier!" said Korney contemptuously, and he turned to the nurse whowas coming in. "Here, what do you think, Marya Efimovna: he let her inwithout a word to anyone," Korney said addressing her. "AlexeyAlexandrovitch will be down immediately—and go into the nursery!"
"A pretty business, a pretty business!" said the nurse. "You, KorneyVassilievitch, you’d best keep him some way or other, the master, whileI’ll run and get her away somehow. A pretty business!"
When the nurse went into the nursery, Seryozha was telling his motherhow he and Nadinka had had a fall in sledging downhill, and had turnedover three times. She was listening to the sound of his voice, watchinghis face and the play of expression on it, touching his hand, but shedid not follow what he was saying. She must go, she must leave him,—thiswas the only thing she was thinking and feeling. She heard the steps ofVassily Lukitch coming up to the door and coughing; she heard, too, thesteps of the nurse as she came near; but she sat like one turned tostone, incapable of beginning to speak or to get up.
"Mistress, darling!" began the nurse, going up to Anna and kissing herhands and shoulders. "God has brought joy indeed to our boy on hisbirthday. You aren’t changed one bit."
"Oh, nurse dear, I didn’t know you were in the house," said Anna,rousing herself for a moment.
"I’m not living here, I’m living with my daughter. I came for thebirthday, Anna Arkadyevna, darling!"
The nurse suddenly burst into tears, and began kissing her hand again.
Seryozha, with radiant eyes and smiles, holding his mother by one handand his nurse by the other, pattered on the rug with his fat little barefeet. The tenderness shown by his beloved nurse to his mother threw himinto an ecstasy.
"Mother! She often comes to see me, and when she comes..." he wasbeginning, but he stopped, noticing that the nurse was saying somethingin a whisper to his mother, and that in his mother’s face there was alook of dread and something like shame, which was so strangelyunbecoming to her.
She went up to him.
"My sweet!" she said.
She could not say _good-bye_, but the expression on her face said it,and he understood. "Darling, darling Kootik!" she used the name by whichshe had called him when he was little, "you won’t forget me? You..." butshe could not say more.
How often afterwards she thought of words she might have said. But nowshe did not know how to say it, and could say nothing. But Seryozha knewall she wanted to say to him. He understood that she was unhappy andloved him. He understood even what the nurse had whispered. He hadcaught the words "always at nine o’clock," and he knew that this wassaid of his father, and that his father and mother could not meet. Thathe understood, but one thing he could not understand—why there should bea look of dread and shame in her face?... She was not in fault, but shewas afraid of him and ashamed of something. He would have liked to put aquestion that would have set at rest this doubt, but he did not dare; hesaw that she was miserable, and he felt for her. Silently he pressedclose to her and whispered, "Don’t go yet. He won’t come just yet."
The mother held him away from her to see what he was thinking, what tosay to him, and in his frightened face she read not only that he wasspeaking of his father, but, as it were, asking her what he ought tothink about his father.
"Seryozha, my darling," she said, "love him; he’s better and kinder thanI am, and I have done him wrong. When you grow up you will judge."
"There’s no one better than you!..." he cried in despair through histears, and, clutching her by the shoulders, he began squeezing her withall his force to him, his arms trembling with the strain.
"My sweet, my little one!" said Anna, and she cried as weakly andchildishly as he.
At that moment the door opened. Vassily Lukitch came in.
At the other door there was the sound of steps, and the nurse in ascared whisper said, "He’s coming," and gave Anna her hat.
Seryozha sank onto the bed and sobbed, hiding his face in his hands.Anna removed his hands, once more kissed his wet face, and with rapidsteps went to the door. Alexey Alexandrovitch walked in, meeting her.Seeing her, he stopped short and bowed his head.
Although she had just said he was better and kinder than she, in therapid glance she flung at him, taking in his whole figure in all itsdetails, feelings of repulsion and hatred for him and jealousy over herson took possession of her. With a swift gesture she put down her veil,and, quickening her pace, almost ran out of the room.
She had not time to undo, and so carried back with her, the parcel oftoys she had chosen the day before in a toy shop with such love andsorrow.


Chapter 31

As intensely as Anna had longed to see her son, and long as she had beenthinking of it and preparing herself for it, she had not in the leastexpected that seeing him would affect her so deeply. On getting back toher lonely rooms in the hotel she could not for a long while understandwhy she was there. "Yes, it’s all over, and I am again alone," she saidto herself, and without taking off her hat she sat down in a low chairby the hearth. Fixing her eyes on a bronze clock standing on a tablebetween the windows, she tried to think.
The French maid brought from abroad came in to suggest she should dress.She gazed at her wonderingly and said, "Presently." A footman offeredher coffee. "Later on," she said.
The Italian nurse, after having taken the baby out in her best, came inwith her, and brought her to Anna. The plump, well-fed little baby, onseeing her mother, as she always did, held out her fat little hands, andwith a smile on her toothless mouth, began, like a fish with a float,bobbing her fingers up and down the starched folds of her embroideredskirt, making them rustle. It was impossible not to smile, not to kissthe baby, impossible not to hold out a finger for her to clutch, crowingand prancing all over; impossible not to offer her a lip which shesucked into her little mouth by way of a kiss. And all this Anna did,and took her in her arms and made her dance, and kissed her fresh littlecheek and bare little elbows; but at the sight of this child it wasplainer than ever to her that the feeling she had for her could not becalled love in comparison with what she felt for Seryozha. Everything inthis baby was charming, but for some reason all this did not go deep toher heart. On her first child, though the child of an unloved father,had been concentrated all the love that had never found satisfaction.Her baby girl had been born in the most painful circumstances and hadnot had a hundredth part of the care and thought which had beenconcentrated on her first child. Besides, in the little girl everythingwas still in the future, while Seryozha was by now almost a personality,and a personality dearly loved. In him there was a conflict of thoughtand feeling; he understood her, he loved her, he judged her, shethought, recalling his words and his eyes. And she was forever—notphysically only but spiritually—divided from him, and it was impossibleto set this right.
She gave the baby back to the nurse, let her go, and opened the locketin which there was Seryozha’s portrait when he was almost of the sameage as the girl. She got up, and, taking off her hat, took up from alittle table an album in which there were photographs of her son atdifferent ages. She wanted to compare them, and began taking them out ofthe album. She took them all out except one, the latest and bestphotograph. In it he was in a white smock, sitting astride a chair, withfrowning eyes and smiling lips. It was his best, most characteristicexpression. With her little supple hands, her white, delicate fingers,that moved with a peculiar intensity today, she pulled at a corner ofthe photograph, but the photograph had caught somewhere, and she couldnot get it out. There was no paper knife on the table, and so, pullingout the photograph that was next to her son’s (it was a photograph ofVronsky taken at Rome in a round hat and with long hair), she used it topush out her son’s photograph. "Oh, here is he!" she said, glancing atthe portrait of Vronsky, and she suddenly recalled that he was the causeof her present misery. She had not once thought of him all the morning.But now, coming all at once upon that manly, noble face, so familiar andso dear to her, she felt a sudden rush of love for him.
"But where is he? How is it he leaves me alone in my misery?" shethought all at once with a feeling of reproach, forgetting she hadherself kept from him everything concerning her son. She sent to ask himto come to her immediately; with a throbbing heart she awaited him,rehearsing to herself the words in which she would tell him all, and theexpressions of love with which he would console her. The messengerreturned with the answer that he had a visitor with him, but that hewould come immediately, and that he asked whether she would let himbring with him Prince Yashvin, who had just arrived in Petersburg. "He’snot coming alone, and since dinner yesterday he has not seen me," shethought; "he’s not coming so that I could tell him everything, butcoming with Yashvin." And all at once a strange idea came to her: whatif he had ceased to love her?
And going over the events of the last few days, it seemed to her thatshe saw in everything a confirmation of this terrible idea. The factthat he had not dined at home yesterday, and the fact that he hadinsisted on their taking separate sets of rooms in Petersburg, and thateven now he was not coming to her alone, as though he were trying toavoid meeting her face to face.
"But he ought to tell me so. I must know that it is so. If I knew it,then I know what I should do," she said to herself, utterly unable topicture to herself the position she would be in if she were convinced ofhis not caring for her. She thought he had ceased to love her, she feltclose upon despair, and consequently she felt exceptionally alert. Sherang for her maid and went to her dressing room. As she dressed, shetook more care over her appearance than she had done all those days, asthough he might, if he had grown cold to her, fall in love with heragain because she had dressed and arranged her hair in the way mostbecoming to her.
She heard the bell ring before she was ready. When she went into thedrawing room it was not he, but Yashvin, who met her eyes. Vronsky waslooking through the photographs of her son, which she had forgotten onthe table, and he made no haste to look round at her.
"We have met already," she said, putting her little hand into the hugehand of Yashvin, whose bashfulness was so queerly out of keeping withhis immense frame and coarse face. "We met last year at the races. Givethem to me," she said, with a rapid movement snatching from Vronsky thephotographs of her son, and glancing significantly at him with flashingeyes. "Were the races good this year? Instead of them I saw the races inthe Corso in Rome. But you don’t care for life abroad," she said with acordial smile. "I know you and all your tastes, though I have seen solittle of you."
"I’m awfully sorry for that, for my tastes are mostly bad," saidYashvin, gnawing at his left mustache.
Having talked a little while, and noticing that Vronsky glanced at theclock, Yashvin asked her whether she would be staying much longer inPetersburg, and unbending his huge figure reached after his cap.
"Not long, I think," she said hesitatingly, glancing at Vronsky.
"So then we shan’t meet again?"
"Come and dine with me," said Anna resolutely, angry it seemed withherself for her embarrassment, but flushing as she always did when shedefined her position before a fresh person. "The dinner here is notgood, but at least you will see him. There is no one of his old friendsin the regiment Alexey cares for as he does for you."
"Delighted," said Yashvin with a smile, from which Vronsky could seethat he liked Anna very much.
Yashvin said good-bye and went away; Vronsky stayed behind.
"Are you going too?" she said to him.
"I’m late already," he answered. "Run along! I’ll catch you up in amoment," he called to Yashvin.
She took him by the hand, and without taking her eyes off him, gazed athim while she ransacked her mind for the words to say that would keephim.
"Wait a minute, there’s something I want to say to you," and taking hisbroad hand she pressed it on her neck. "Oh, was it right my asking himto dinner?"
"You did quite right," he said with a serene smile that showed his eventeeth, and he kissed her hand.
"Alexey, you have not changed to me?" she said, pressing his hand inboth of hers. "Alexey, I am miserable here. When are we going away?"
"Soon, soon. You wouldn’t believe how disagreeable our way of livinghere is to me too," he said, and he drew away his hand.
"Well, go, go!" she said in a tone of offense, and she walked quicklyaway from him.


Chapter 32

When Vronsky returned home, Anna was not yet home. Soon after he hadleft, some lady, so they told him, had come to see her, and she had goneout with her. That she had gone out without leaving word where she wasgoing, that she had not yet come back, and that all the morning she hadbeen going about somewhere without a word to him—all this, together withthe strange look of excitement in her face in the morning, and therecollection of the hostile tone with which she had before Yashvinalmost snatched her son’s photographs out of his hands, made himserious. He decided he absolutely must speak openly with her. And hewaited for her in her drawing room. But Anna did not return alone, butbrought with her her old unmarried aunt, Princess Oblonskaya. This wasthe lady who had come in the morning, and with whom Anna had gone outshopping. Anna appeared not to notice Vronsky’s worried and inquiringexpression, and began a lively account of her morning’s shopping. He sawthat there was something working within her; in her flashing eyes, whenthey rested for a moment on him, there was an intense concentration, andin her words and movements there was that nervous rapidity and gracewhich, during the early period of their intimacy, had so fascinated him,but which now so disturbed and alarmed him.
The dinner was laid for four. All were gathered together and about to gointo the little dining room when Tushkevitch made his appearance with amessage from Princess Betsy. Princess Betsy begged her to excuse her nothaving come to say good-bye; she had been indisposed, but begged Anna tocome to her between half-past six and nine o’clock. Vronsky glanced atAnna at the precise limit of time, so suggestive of steps having beentaken that she should meet no one; but Anna appeared not to notice it.
"Very sorry that I can’t come just between half-past six and nine," shesaid with a faint smile.
"The princess will be very sorry."
"And so am I."
"You’re going, no doubt, to hear Patti?" said Tushkevitch.
"Patti? You suggest the idea to me. I would go if it were possible toget a box."
"I can get one," Tushkevitch offered his services.
"I should be very, very grateful to you," said Anna. "But won’t you dinewith us?"
Vronsky gave a hardly perceptible shrug. He was at a complete loss tounderstand what Anna was about. What had she brought the old PrincessOblonskaya home for, what had she made Tushkevitch stay to dinner for,and, most amazing of all, why was she sending him for a box? Could shepossibly think in her position of going to Patti’s benefit, where allthe circle of her acquaintances would be? He looked at her with seriouseyes, but she responded with that defiant, half-mirthful, half-desperatelook, the meaning of which he could not comprehend. At dinner Anna wasin aggressively high spirits—she almost flirted both with Tushkevitchand with Yashvin. When they got up from dinner and Tushkevitch had goneto get a box at the opera, Yashvin went to smoke, and Vronsky went downwith him to his own rooms. After sitting there for some time he ranupstairs. Anna was already dressed in a low-necked gown of light silkand velvet that she had had made in Paris, and with costly white lace onher head, framing her face, and particularly becoming, showing up herdazzling beauty.
"Are you really going to the theater?" he said, trying not to look ather.
"Why do you ask with such alarm?" she said, wounded again at his notlooking at her. "Why shouldn’t I go?"
She appeared not to understand the motive of his words.
"Oh, of course, there’s no reason whatever," he said, frowning.
"That’s just what I say," she said, willfully refusing to see the ironyof his tone, and quietly turning back her long, perfumed glove.
"Anna, for God’s sake! what is the matter with you?" he said, appealingto her exactly as once her husband had done.
"I don’t understand what you are asking."
"You know that it’s out of the question to go."
"Why so? I’m not going alone. Princess Varvara has gone to dress, she isgoing with me."
He shrugged his shoulders with an air of perplexity and despair.
"But do you mean to say you don’t know?..." he began.
"But I don’t care to know!" she almost shrieked. "I don’t care to. Do Iregret what I have done? No, no, no! If it were all to do again from thebeginning, it would be the same. For us, for you and for me, there isonly one thing that matters, whether we love each other. Other people weneed not consider. Why are we living here apart and not seeing eachother? Why can’t I go? I love you, and I don’t care for anything," shesaid in Russian, glancing at him with a peculiar gleam in her eyes thathe could not understand. "If you have not changed to me, why don’t youlook at me?"
He looked at her. He saw all the beauty of her face and full dress,always so becoming to her. But now her beauty and elegance were justwhat irritated him.
"My feeling cannot change, you know, but I beg you, I entreat you," hesaid again in French, with a note of tender supplication in his voice,but with coldness in his eyes.
She did not hear his words, but she saw the coldness of his eyes, andanswered with irritation:
"And I beg you to explain why I should not go."
"Because it might cause you..." he hesitated.
"I don’t understand. Yashvin _n’est pas compromettant_, and PrincessVarvara is no worse than others. Oh, here she is!"


Chapter 33

Vronsky for the first time experienced a feeling of anger against Anna,almost a hatred for her willfully refusing to understand her ownposition. This feeling was aggravated by his being unable to tell herplainly the cause of his anger. If he had told her directly what he wasthinking, he would have said:
"In that dress, with a princess only too well known to everyone, to showyourself at the theater is equivalent not merely to acknowledging yourposition as a fallen woman, but is flinging down a challenge to society,that is to say, cutting yourself off from it forever."
He could not say that to her. "But how can she fail to see it, and whatis going on in her?" he said to himself. He felt at the same time thathis respect for her was diminished while his sense of her beauty wasintensified.
He went back scowling to his rooms, and sitting down beside Yashvin,who, with his long legs stretched out on a chair, was drinking brandyand seltzer water, he ordered a glass of the same for himself.
"You were talking of Lankovsky’s Powerful. That’s a fine horse, and Iwould advise you to buy him," said Yashvin, glancing at his comrade’sgloomy face. "His hind-quarters aren’t quite first-rate, but the legsand head—one couldn’t wish for anything better."
"I think I will take him," answered Vronsky.
Their conversation about horses interested him, but he did not for aninstant forget Anna, and could not help listening to the sound of stepsin the corridor and looking at the clock on the chimney piece.
"Anna Arkadyevna gave orders to announce that she has gone to thetheater."
Yashvin, tipping another glass of brandy into the bubbling water, drankit and got up, buttoning his coat.
"Well, let’s go," he said, faintly smiling under his mustache, andshowing by this smile that he knew the cause of Vronsky’s gloominess,and did not attach any significance to it.
"I’m not going," Vronsky answered gloomily.
"Well, I must, I promised to. Good-bye, then. If you do, come to thestalls; you can take Kruzin’s stall," added Yashvin as he went out.
"No, I’m busy."
"A wife is a care, but it’s worse when she’s not a wife," thoughtYashvin, as he walked out of the hotel.
Vronsky, left alone, got up from his chair and began pacing up and downthe room.
"And what’s today? The fourth night.... Yegor and his wife are there,and my mother, most likely. Of course all Petersburg’s there. Now she’sgone in, taken off her cloak and come into the light. Tushkevitch,Yashvin, Princess Varvara," he pictured them to himself.... "What aboutme? Either that I’m frightened or have given up to Tushkevitch the rightto protect her? From every point of view—stupid, stupid!... And why isshe putting me in such a position?" he said with a gesture of despair.
With that gesture he knocked against the table, on which there wasstanding the seltzer water and the decanter of brandy, and almost upsetit. He tried to catch it, let it slip, and angrily kicked the table overand rang.
"If you care to be in my service," he said to the valet who came in,"you had better remember your duties. This shouldn’t be here. You oughtto have cleared away."
The valet, conscious of his own innocence, would have defended himself,but glancing at his master, he saw from his face that the only thing todo was to be silent, and hurriedly threading his way in and out, droppeddown on the carpet and began gathering up the whole and broken glassesand bottles.
"That’s not your duty; send the waiter to clear away, and get my dresscoat out."
Vronsky went into the theater at half-past eight. The performance was infull swing. The little old box-keeper, recognizing Vronsky as he helpedhim off with his fur coat, called him "Your Excellency," and suggestedhe should not take a number but should simply call Fyodor. In thebrightly lighted corridor there was no one but the box-opener and twoattendants with fur cloaks on their arms listening at the doors. Throughthe closed doors came the sounds of the discreet _staccato_accompaniment of the orchestra, and a single female voice renderingdistinctly a musical phrase. The door opened to let the box-opener slipthrough, and the phrase drawing to the end reached Vronsky’s hearingclearly. But the doors were closed again at once, and Vronsky did nothear the end of the phrase and the cadence of the accompaniment, thoughhe knew from the thunder of applause that it was over. When he enteredthe hall, brilliantly lighted with chandeliers and gas jets, the noisewas still going on. On the stage the singer, bowing and smiling, withbare shoulders flashing with diamonds, was, with the help of the tenorwho had given her his arm, gathering up the bouquets that were flyingawkwardly over the footlights. Then she went up to a gentleman withglossy pomaded hair parted down the center, who was stretching acrossthe footlights holding out something to her, and all the public in thestalls as well as in the boxes was in excitement, craning forward,shouting and clapping. The conductor in his high chair assisted inpassing the offering, and straightened his white tie. Vronsky walkedinto the middle of the stalls, and, standing still, began looking abouthim. That day less than ever was his attention turned upon the familiar,habitual surroundings, the stage, the noise, all the familiar,uninteresting, particolored herd of spectators in the packed theater.
There were, as always, the same ladies of some sort with officers ofsome sort in the back of the boxes; the same gaily dressed women—Godknows who—and uniforms and black coats; the same dirty crowd in theupper gallery; and among the crowd, in the boxes and in the front rows,were some forty of the _real_ people. And to those oases Vronsky at oncedirected his attention, and with them he entered at once into relation.
The act was over when he went in, and so he did not go straight to hisbrother’s box, but going up to the first row of stalls stopped at thefootlights with Serpuhovskoy, who, standing with one knee raised and hisheel on the footlights, caught sight of him in the distance and beckonedto him, smiling.
Vronsky had not yet seen Anna. He purposely avoided looking in herdirection. But he knew by the direction of people’s eyes where she was.He looked round discreetly, but he was not seeking her; expecting theworst, his eyes sought for Alexey Alexandrovitch. To his relief AlexeyAlexandrovitch was not in the theater that evening.
"How little of the military man there is left in you!" Serpuhovskoy wassaying to him. "A diplomat, an artist, something of that sort, one wouldsay."
"Yes, it was like going back home when I put on a black coat," answeredVronsky, smiling and slowly taking out his opera glass.
"Well, I’ll own I envy you there. When I come back from abroad and puton this," he touched his epaulets, "I regret my freedom."
Serpuhovskoy had long given up all hope of Vronsky’s career, but heliked him as before, and was now particularly cordial to him.
"What a pity you were not in time for the first act!"
Vronsky, listening with one ear, moved his opera glass from the stallsand scanned the boxes. Near a lady in a turban and a bald old man, whoseemed to wave angrily in the moving opera glass, Vronsky suddenlycaught sight of Anna’s head, proud, strikingly beautiful, and smiling inthe frame of lace. She was in the fifth box, twenty paces from him. Shewas sitting in front, and slightly turning, was saying something toYashvin. The setting of her head on her handsome, broad shoulders, andthe restrained excitement and brilliance of her eyes and her whole facereminded him of her just as he had seen her at the ball in Moscow. Buthe felt utterly different towards her beauty now. In his feeling for hernow there was no element of mystery, and so her beauty, though itattracted him even more intensely than before, gave him now a sense ofinjury. She was not looking in his direction, but Vronsky felt that shehad seen him already.
When Vronsky turned the opera glass again in that direction, he noticedthat Princess Varvara was particularly red, and kept laughingunnaturally and looking round at the next box. Anna, folding her fan andtapping it on the red velvet, was gazing away and did not see, andobviously did not wish to see, what was taking place in the next box.Yashvin’s face wore the expression which was common when he was losingat cards. Scowling, he sucked the left end of his mustache further andfurther into his mouth, and cast sidelong glances at the next box.
In that box on the left were the Kartasovs. Vronsky knew them, and knewthat Anna was acquainted with them. Madame Kartasova, a thin littlewoman, was standing up in her box, and, her back turned upon Anna, shewas putting on a mantle that her husband was holding for her. Her facewas pale and angry, and she was talking excitedly. Kartasov, a fat, baldman, was continually looking round at Anna, while he attempted to soothehis wife. When the wife had gone out, the husband lingered a long while,and tried to catch Anna’s eye, obviously anxious to bow to her. ButAnna, with unmistakable intention, avoided noticing him, and talked toYashvin, whose cropped head was bent down to her. Kartasov went outwithout making his salutation, and the box was left empty.
Vronsky could not understand exactly what had passed between theKartasovs and Anna, but he saw that something humiliating for Anna hadhappened. He knew this both from what he had seen, and most of all fromthe face of Anna, who, he could see, was taxing every nerve to carrythrough the part she had taken up. And in maintaining this attitude ofexternal composure she was completely successful. Anyone who did notknow her and her circle, who had not heard all the utterances of thewomen expressive of commiseration, indignation, and amazement, that sheshould show herself in society, and show herself so conspicuously withher lace and her beauty, would have admired the serenity and lovelinessof this woman without a suspicion that she was undergoing the sensationsof a man in the stocks.
Knowing that something had happened, but not knowing precisely what,Vronsky felt a thrill of agonizing anxiety, and hoping to find outsomething, he went towards his brother’s box. Purposely choosing the wayround furthest from Anna’s box, he jostled as he came out against thecolonel of his old regiment talking to two acquaintances. Vronsky heardthe name of Madame Karenina, and noticed how the colonel hastened toaddress Vronsky loudly by name, with a meaning glance at his companions.
"Ah, Vronsky! When are you coming to the regiment? We can’t let you offwithout a supper. You’re one of the old set," said the colonel of hisregiment.
"I can’t stop, awfully sorry, another time," said Vronsky, and he ranupstairs towards his brother’s box.
The old countess, Vronsky’s mother, with her steel-gray curls, was inhis brother’s box. Varya with the young Princess Sorokina met him in thecorridor.
Leaving the Princess Sorokina with her mother, Varya held out her handto her brother-in-law, and began immediately to speak of what interestedhim. She was more excited than he had ever seen her.
"I think it’s mean and hateful, and Madame Kartasova had no right to doit. Madame Karenina..." she began.
"But what is it? I don’t know."
"What? you’ve not heard?"
"You know I should be the last person to hear of it."
"There isn’t a more spiteful creature than that Madame Kartasova!"
"But what did she do?"
"My husband told me.... She has insulted Madame Karenina. Her husbandbegan talking to her across the box, and Madame Kartasova made a scene.She said something aloud, he says, something insulting, and went away."
"Count, your maman is asking for you," said the young Princess Sorokina,peeping out of the door of the box.
"I’ve been expecting you all the while," said his mother, smilingsarcastically. "You were nowhere to be seen."
Her son saw that she could not suppress a smile of delight.
"Good evening, maman. I have come to you," he said coldly.
"Why aren’t you going to _faire la cour à Madame Karenina?_" she wenton, when Princess Sorokina had moved away. "_Elle fait sensation. Onoublie la Patti pour elle_."
"Maman, I have asked you not to say anything to me of that," heanswered, scowling.
"I’m only saying what everyone’s saying."
Vronsky made no reply, and saying a few words to Princess Sorokina, hewent away. At the door he met his brother.
"Ah, Alexey!" said his brother. "How disgusting! Idiot of a woman,nothing else.... I wanted to go straight to her. Let’s go together."
Vronsky did not hear him. With rapid steps he went downstairs; he feltthat he must do something, but he did not know what. Anger with her forhaving put herself and him in such a false position, together with pityfor her suffering, filled his heart. He went down, and made straight forAnna’s box. At her box stood Stremov, talking to her.
"There are no more tenors. _Le moule en est brisé!_"
Vronsky bowed to her and stopped to greet Stremov.
"You came in late, I think, and have missed the best song," Anna said toVronsky, glancing ironically, he thought, at him.
"I am a poor judge of music," he said, looking sternly at her.
"Like Prince Yashvin," she said smiling, "who considers that Patti singstoo loud."
"Thank you," she said, her little hand in its long glove taking theplaybill Vronsky picked up, and suddenly at that instant her lovely facequivered. She got up and went into the interior of the box.
Noticing in the next act that her box was empty, Vronsky, rousingindignant "hushes" in the silent audience, went out in the middle of asolo and drove home.
Anna was already at home. When Vronsky went up to her, she was in thesame dress as she had worn at the theater. She was sitting in the firstarmchair against the wall, looking straight before her. She looked athim, and at once resumed her former position.
"Anna," he said.
"You, you are to blame for everything!" she cried, with tears of despairand hatred in her voice, getting up.
"I begged, I implored you not to go, I knew it would be unpleasant...."
"Unpleasant!" she cried—"hideous! As long as I live I shall never forgetit. She said it was a disgrace to sit beside me."
"A silly woman’s chatter," he said: "but why risk it, why provoke?..."
"I hate your calm. You ought not to have brought me to this. If you hadloved me..."
"Anna! How does the question of my love come in?"
"Oh, if you loved me, as I love, if you were tortured as I am!..." shesaid, looking at him with an expression of terror.
He was sorry for her, and angry notwithstanding. He assured her of hislove because he saw that this was the only means of soothing her, and hedid not reproach her in words, but in his heart he reproached her.
And the asseverations of his love, which seemed to him so vulgar that hewas ashamed to utter them, she drank in eagerly, and gradually becamecalmer. The next day, completely reconciled, they left for the country.



PART SIX


Chapter 1

Darya Alexandrovna spent the summer with her children at Pokrovskoe, ather sister Kitty Levin’s. The house on her own estate was quite inruins, and Levin and his wife had persuaded her to spend the summer withthem. Stepan Arkadyevitch greatly approved of the arrangement. He saidhe was very sorry his official duties prevented him from spending thesummer in the country with his family, which would have been thegreatest happiness for him; and remaining in Moscow, he came down to thecountry from time to time for a day or two. Besides the Oblonskys, withall their children and their governess, the old princess too came tostay that summer with the Levins, as she considered it her duty to watchover her inexperienced daughter in her _interesting condition_.Moreover, Varenka, Kitty’s friend abroad, kept her promise to come toKitty when she was married, and stayed with her friend. All of thesewere friends or relations of Levin’s wife. And though he liked them all,he rather regretted his own Levin world and ways, which was smothered bythis influx of the "Shtcherbatsky element," as he called it to himself.Of his own relations there stayed with him only Sergey Ivanovitch, buthe too was a man of the Koznishev and not the Levin stamp, so that theLevin spirit was utterly obliterated.
In the Levins’ house, so long deserted, there were now so many peoplethat almost all the rooms were occupied, and almost every day ithappened that the old princess, sitting down to table, counted them allover, and put the thirteenth grandson or granddaughter at a separatetable. And Kitty, with her careful housekeeping, had no little troubleto get all the chickens, turkeys, and geese, of which so many wereneeded to satisfy the summer appetites of the visitors and children.
The whole family were sitting at dinner. Dolly’s children, with theirgoverness and Varenka, were making plans for going to look formushrooms. Sergey Ivanovitch, who was looked up to by all the party forhis intellect and learning, with a respect that almost amounted to awe,surprised everyone by joining in the conversation about mushrooms.
"Take me with you. I am very fond of picking mushrooms," he said,looking at Varenka; "I think it’s a very nice occupation."
"Oh, we shall be delighted," answered Varenka, coloring a little. Kittyexchanged meaningful glances with Dolly. The proposal of the learned andintellectual Sergey Ivanovitch to go looking for mushrooms with Varenkaconfirmed certain theories of Kitty’s with which her mind had been verybusy of late. She made haste to address some remark to her mother, sothat her look should not be noticed. After dinner Sergey Ivanovitch satwith his cup of coffee at the drawing-room window, and while he tookpart in a conversation he had begun with his brother, he watched thedoor through which the children would start on the mushroom-pickingexpedition. Levin was sitting in the window near his brother.
Kitty stood beside her husband, evidently awaiting the end of aconversation that had no interest for her, in order to tell himsomething.
"You have changed in many respects since your marriage, and for thebetter," said Sergey Ivanovitch, smiling to Kitty, and obviously littleinterested in the conversation, "but you have remained true to yourpassion for defending the most paradoxical theories."
"Katya, it’s not good for you to stand," her husband said to her,putting a chair for her and looking significantly at her.
"Oh, and there’s no time either," added Sergey Ivanovitch, seeing thechildren running out.
At the head of them all Tanya galloped sideways, in her tightly-drawnstockings, and waving a basket and Sergey Ivanovitch’s hat, she ranstraight up to him.
Boldly running up to Sergey Ivanovitch with shining eyes, so like herfather’s fine eyes, she handed him his hat and made as though she wouldput it on for him, softening her freedom by a shy and friendly smile.
"Varenka’s waiting," she said, carefully putting his hat on, seeing fromSergey Ivanovitch’s smile that she might do so.
Varenka was standing at the door, dressed in a yellow print gown, with awhite kerchief on her head.
"I’m coming, I’m coming, Varvara Andreevna," said Sergey Ivanovitch,finishing his cup of coffee, and putting into their separate pockets hishandkerchief and cigar-case.
"And how sweet my Varenka is! eh?" said Kitty to her husband, as soon asSergey Ivanovitch rose. She spoke so that Sergey Ivanovitch could hear,and it was clear that she meant him to do so. "And how good-looking sheis—such a refined beauty! Varenka!" Kitty shouted. "Shall you be in themill copse? We’ll come out to you."
"You certainly forget your condition, Kitty," said the old princess,hurriedly coming out at the door. "You mustn’t shout like that."
Varenka, hearing Kitty’s voice and her mother’s reprimand, went withlight, rapid steps up to Kitty. The rapidity of her movement, herflushed and eager face, everything betrayed that something out of thecommon was going on in her. Kitty knew what this was, and had beenwatching her intently. She called Varenka at that moment merely in ordermentally to give her a blessing for the important event which, as Kittyfancied, was bound to come to pass that day after dinner in the wood.
"Varenka, I should be very happy if a certain something were to happen,"she whispered as she kissed her.
"And are you coming with us?" Varenka said to Levin in confusion,pretending not to have heard what had been said.
"I am coming, but only as far as the threshing-floor, and there I shallstop."
"Why, what do you want there?" said Kitty.
"I must go to have a look at the new wagons, and to check the invoice,"said Levin; "and where will you be?"
"On the terrace."


Chapter 2

On the terrace were assembled all the ladies of the party. They alwaysliked sitting there after dinner, and that day they had work to do theretoo. Besides the sewing and knitting of baby clothes, with which all ofthem were busy, that afternoon jam was being made on the terrace by amethod new to Agafea Mihalovna, without the addition of water. Kitty hadintroduced this new method, which had been in use in her home. AgafeaMihalovna, to whom the task of jam-making had always been intrusted,considering that what had been done in the Levin household could not beamiss, had nevertheless put water with the strawberries, maintainingthat the jam could not be made without it. She had been caught in theact, and was now making jam before everyone, and it was to be proved toher conclusively that jam could be very well made without water.
Agafea Mihalovna, her face heated and angry, her hair untidy, and herthin arms bare to the elbows, was turning the preserving-pan over thecharcoal stove, looking darkly at the raspberries and devoutly hopingthey would stick and not cook properly. The princess, conscious thatAgafea Mihalovna’s wrath must be chiefly directed against her, as theperson responsible for the raspberry jam-making, tried to appear to beabsorbed in other things and not interested in the jam, talked of othermatters, but cast stealthy glances in the direction of the stove.
"I always buy my maids’ dresses myself, of some cheap material," theprincess said, continuing the previous conversation. "Isn’t it time toskim it, my dear?" she added, addressing Agafea Mihalovna. "There’s notthe slightest need for you to do it, and it’s hot for you," she said,stopping Kitty.
"I’ll do it," said Dolly, and getting up, she carefully passed the spoonover the frothing sugar, and from time to time shook off the clingingjam from the spoon by knocking it on a plate that was covered withyellow-red scum and blood-colored syrup. "How they’ll enjoy this attea-time!" she thought of her children, remembering how she herself as achild had wondered how it was the grown-up people did not eat what wasbest of all—the scum of the jam.
"Stiva says it’s much better to give money." Dolly took up meanwhile theweighty subject under discussion, what presents should be made toservants. "But..."
"Money’s out of the question!" the princess and Kitty exclaimed with onevoice. "They appreciate a present..."
"Well, last year, for instance, I bought our Matrona Semyenovna, not apoplin, but something of that sort," said the princess.
"I remember she was wearing it on your nameday."
"A charming pattern—so simple and refined,—I should have liked itmyself, if she hadn’t had it. Something like Varenka’s. So pretty andinexpensive."
"Well, now I think it’s done," said Dolly, dropping the syrup from thespoon.
"When it sets as it drops, it’s ready. Cook it a little longer, AgafeaMihalovna."
"The flies!" said Agafea Mihalovna angrily. "It’ll be just the same,"she added.
"Ah! how sweet it is! don’t frighten it!" Kitty said suddenly, lookingat a sparrow that had settled on the step and was pecking at the centerof a raspberry.
"Yes, but you keep a little further from the stove," said her mother.
"_À propos de Varenka_," said Kitty, speaking in French, as they hadbeen doing all the while, so that Agafea Mihalovna should not understandthem, "you know, mamma, I somehow expect things to be settled today. Youknow what I mean. How splendid it would be!"
"But what a famous matchmaker she is!" said Dolly. "How carefully andcleverly she throws them together!..."
"No; tell me, mamma, what do you think?"
"Why, what is one to think? He" (_he_ meant Sergey Ivanovitch) "might atany time have been a match for anyone in Russia; now, of course, he’snot quite a young man, still I know ever so many girls would be glad tomarry him even now.... She’s a very nice girl, but he might..."
"Oh, no, mamma, do understand why, for him and for her too, nothingbetter could be imagined. In the first place, she’s charming!" saidKitty, crooking one of her fingers.
"He thinks her very attractive, that’s certain," assented Dolly.
"Then he occupies such a position in society that he has no need to lookfor either fortune or position in his wife. All he needs is a good,sweet wife—a restful one."
"Well, with her he would certainly be restful," Dolly assented.
"Thirdly, that she should love him. And so it is ... that is, it wouldbe so splendid!... I look forward to seeing them coming out of theforest—and everything settled. I shall see at once by their eyes. Ishould be so delighted! What do you think, Dolly?"
"But don’t excite yourself. It’s not at all the thing for you to beexcited," said her mother.
"Oh, I’m not excited, mamma. I fancy he will make her an offer today."
"Ah, that’s so strange, how and when a man makes an offer!... There is asort of barrier, and all at once it’s broken down," said Dolly, smilingpensively and recalling her past with Stepan Arkadyevitch.
"Mamma, how did papa make you an offer?" Kitty asked suddenly.
"There was nothing out of the way, it was very simple," answered theprincess, but her face beamed all over at the recollection.
"Oh, but how was it? You loved him, anyway, before you were allowed tospeak?"
Kitty felt a peculiar pleasure in being able now to talk to her motheron equal terms about those questions of such paramount interest in awoman’s life.
"Of course I did; he had come to stay with us in the country."
"But how was it settled between you, mamma?"
"You imagine, I dare say, that you invented something quite new? It’salways just the same: it was settled by the eyes, by smiles..."
"How nicely you said that, mamma! It’s just by the eyes, by smiles thatit’s done," Dolly assented.
"But what words did he say?"
"What did Kostya say to you?"
"He wrote it in chalk. It was wonderful.... How long ago it seems!" shesaid.
And the three women all fell to musing on the same thing. Kitty was thefirst to break the silence. She remembered all that last winter beforeher marriage, and her passion for Vronsky.
"There’s one thing ... that old love affair of Varenka’s," she said, anatural chain of ideas bringing her to this point. "I should have likedto say something to Sergey Ivanovitch, to prepare him. They’re all—allmen, I mean," she added, "awfully jealous over our past."
"Not all," said Dolly. "You judge by your own husband. It makes himmiserable even now to remember Vronsky. Eh? that’s true, isn’t it?"
"Yes," Kitty answered, a pensive smile in her eyes.
"But I really don’t know," the mother put in in defense of her motherlycare of her daughter, "what there was in your past that could worry him?That Vronsky paid you attentions—that happens to every girl."
"Oh, yes, but we didn’t mean that," Kitty said, flushing a little.
"No, let me speak," her mother went on, "why, you yourself would not letme have a talk to Vronsky. Don’t you remember?"
"Oh, mamma!" said Kitty, with an expression of suffering.
"There’s no keeping you young people in check nowadays.... Yourfriendship could not have gone beyond what was suitable. I should myselfhave called upon him to explain himself. But, my darling, it’s not rightfor you to be agitated. Please remember that, and calm yourself."
"I’m perfectly calm, maman."
"How happy it was for Kitty that Anna came then," said Dolly, "and howunhappy for her. It turned out quite the opposite," she said, struck byher own ideas. "Then Anna was so happy, and Kitty thought herselfunhappy. Now it is just the opposite. I often think of her."
"A nice person to think about! Horrid, repulsive woman—no heart," saidher mother, who could not forget that Kitty had married not Vronsky, butLevin.
"What do you want to talk of it for?" Kitty said with annoyance. "Inever think about it, and I don’t want to think of it.... And I don’twant to think of it," she said, catching the sound of her husband’swell-known step on the steps of the terrace.
"What’s that you don’t want to think about?" inquired Levin, coming ontothe terrace.
But no one answered him, and he did not repeat the question.
"I’m sorry I’ve broken in on your feminine parliament," he said, lookinground on every one discontentedly, and perceiving that they had beentalking of something which they would not talk about before him.
For a second he felt that he was sharing the feeling of AgafeaMihalovna, vexation at their making jam without water, and altogether atthe outside Shtcherbatsky element. He smiled, however, and went up toKitty.
"Well, how are you?" he asked her, looking at her with the expressionwith which everyone looked at her now.
"Oh, very well," said Kitty, smiling, "and how have things gone withyou?"
"The wagons held three times as much as the old carts did. Well, are wegoing for the children? I’ve ordered the horses to be put in."
"What! you want to take Kitty in the wagonette?" her mother saidreproachfully.
"Yes, at a walking pace, princess."
Levin never called the princess "maman" as men often do call theirmothers-in-law, and the princess disliked his not doing so. But thoughhe liked and respected the princess, Levin could not call her so withouta sense of profaning his feeling for his dead mother.
"Come with us, maman," said Kitty.
"I don’t like to see such imprudence."
"Well, I’ll walk then, I’m so well." Kitty got up and went to herhusband and took his hand.
"You may be well, but everything in moderation," said the princess.
"Well, Agafea Mihalovna, is the jam done?" said Levin, smiling to AgafeaMihalovna, and trying to cheer her up. "Is it all right in the new way?"
"I suppose it’s all right. For our notions it’s boiled too long."
"It’ll be all the better, Agafea Mihalovna, it won’t mildew, even thoughour ice has begun to thaw already, so that we’ve no cool cellar to storeit," said Kitty, at once divining her husband’s motive, and addressingthe old housekeeper with the same feeling; "but your pickle’s so good,that mamma says she never tasted any like it," she added, smiling, andputting her kerchief straight.
Agafea Mihalovna looked angrily at Kitty.
"You needn’t try to console me, mistress. I need only to look at youwith him, and I feel happy," she said, and something in the roughfamiliarity of that _with him_ touched Kitty.
"Come along with us to look for mushrooms, you will show us the bestplaces." Agafea Mihalovna smiled and shook her head, as though to say:"I should like to be angry with you too, but I can’t."
"Do it, please, by my receipt," said the princess; "put some paper overthe jam, and moisten it with a little rum, and without even ice, it willnever go mildewy."


Chapter 3

Kitty was particularly glad of a chance of being alone with her husband,for she had noticed the shade of mortification that had passed over hisface—always so quick to reflect every feeling—at the moment when he hadcome onto the terrace and asked what they were talking of, and had gotno answer.
When they had set off on foot ahead of the others, and had come out ofsight of the house onto the beaten dusty road, marked with rusty wheelsand sprinkled with grains of corn, she clung faster to his arm andpressed it closer to her. He had quite forgotten the momentaryunpleasant impression, and alone with her he felt, now that the thoughtof her approaching motherhood was never for a moment absent from hismind, a new and delicious bliss, quite pure from all alloy of sense, inthe being near to the woman he loved. There was no need of speech, yethe longed to hear the sound of her voice, which like her eyes hadchanged since she had been with child. In her voice, as in her eyes,there was that softness and gravity which is found in people continuallyconcentrated on some cherished pursuit.
"So you’re not tired? Lean more on me," said he.
"No, I’m so glad of a chance of being alone with you, and I must own,though I’m happy with them, I do regret our winter evenings alone."
"That was good, but this is even better. Both are better," he said,squeezing her hand.
"Do you know what we were talking about when you came in?"
"About jam?"
"Oh, yes, about jam too; but afterwards, about how men make offers."
"Ah!" said Levin, listening more to the sound of her voice than to thewords she was saying, and all the while paying attention to the road,which passed now through the forest, and avoiding places where she mightmake a false step.
"And about Sergey Ivanovitch and Varenka. You’ve noticed?... I’m veryanxious for it," she went on. "What do you think about it?" And shepeeped into his face.
"I don’t know what to think," Levin answered, smiling. "Sergey seemsvery strange to me in that way. I told you, you know..."
"Yes, that he was in love with that girl who died...."
"That was when I was a child; I know about it from hearsay andtradition. I remember him then. He was wonderfully sweet. But I’vewatched him since with women; he is friendly, some of them he likes, butone feels that to him they’re simply people, not women."
"Yes, but now with Varenka ... I fancy there’s something..."
"Perhaps there is.... But one has to know him.... He’s a peculiar,wonderful person. He lives a spiritual life only. He’s too pure, tooexalted a nature."
"Why? Would this lower him, then?"
"No, but he’s so used to a spiritual life that he can’t reconcilehimself with actual fact, and Varenka is after all fact."
Levin had grown used by now to uttering his thought boldly, withouttaking the trouble of clothing it in exact language. He knew that hiswife, in such moments of loving tenderness as now, would understand whathe meant to say from a hint, and she did understand him.
"Yes, but there’s not so much of that actual fact about her as about me.I can see that he would never have cared for me. She is altogetherspiritual."
"Oh, no, he is so fond of you, and I am always so glad when my peoplelike you...."
"Yes, he’s very nice to me; but..."
"It’s not as it was with poor Nikolay ... you really cared for eachother," Levin finished. "Why not speak of him?" he added. "I sometimesblame myself for not; it ends in one’s forgetting. Ah, how terrible anddear he was!... Yes, what were we talking about?" Levin said, after apause.
"You think he can’t fall in love," said Kitty, translating into her ownlanguage.
"It’s not so much that he can’t fall in love," Levin said, smiling, "buthe has not the weakness necessary.... I’ve always envied him, and evennow, when I’m so happy, I still envy him."
"You envy him for not being able to fall in love?"
"I envy him for being better than I," said Levin. "He does not live forhimself. His whole life is subordinated to his duty. And that’s why hecan be calm and contented."
"And you?" Kitty asked, with an ironical and loving smile.
She could never have explained the chain of thought that made her smile;but the last link in it was that her husband, in exalting his brotherand abasing himself, was not quite sincere. Kitty knew that thisinsincerity came from his love for his brother, from his sense of shameat being too happy, and above all from his unflagging craving to bebetter—she loved it in him, and so she smiled.
"And you? What are you dissatisfied with?" she asked, with the samesmile.
Her disbelief in his self-dissatisfaction delighted him, andunconsciously he tried to draw her into giving utterance to the groundsof her disbelief.
"I am happy, but dissatisfied with myself..." he said.
"Why, how can you be dissatisfied with yourself if you are happy?"
"Well, how shall I say?... In my heart I really care for nothingwhatever but that you should not stumble—see? Oh, but really you mustn’tskip about like that!" he cried, breaking off to scold her for too agilea movement in stepping over a branch that lay in the path. "But when Ithink about myself, and compare myself with others, especially with mybrother, I feel I’m a poor creature."
"But in what way?" Kitty pursued with the same smile. "Don’t you toowork for others? What about your co-operative settlement, and your workon the estate, and your book?..."
"Oh, but I feel, and particularly just now—it’s your fault," he said,pressing her hand—"that all that doesn’t count. I do it in a wayhalfheartedly. If I could care for all that as I care for you!...Instead of that, I do it in these days like a task that is set me."
"Well, what would you say about papa?" asked Kitty. "Is he a poorcreature then, as he does nothing for the public good?"
"He?—no! But then one must have the simplicity, the straightforwardness,the goodness of your father: and I haven’t got that. I do nothing, and Ifret about it. It’s all your doing. Before there was you—and _this_too," he added with a glance towards her waist that she understood—"Iput all my energies into work; now I can’t, and I’m ashamed; I do itjust as though it were a task set me, I’m pretending...."
"Well, but would you like to change this minute with Sergey Ivanovitch?"said Kitty. "Would you like to do this work for the general good, and tolove the task set you, as he does, and nothing else?"
"Of course not," said Levin. "But I’m so happy that I don’t understandanything. So you think he’ll make her an offer today?" he added after abrief silence.
"I think so, and I don’t think so. Only, I’m awfully anxious for it.Here, wait a minute." She stooped down and picked a wild camomile at theedge of the path. "Come, count: he does propose, he doesn’t," she said,giving him the flower.
"He does, he doesn’t," said Levin, tearing off the white petals.
"No, no!" Kitty, snatching at his hand, stopped him. She had beenwatching his fingers with interest. "You picked off two."
"Oh, but see, this little one shan’t count to make up," said Levin,tearing off a little half-grown petal. "Here’s the wagonette overtakingus."
"Aren’t you tired, Kitty?" called the princess.
"Not in the least."
"If you are you can get in, as the horses are quiet and walking."
But it was not worth while to get in, they were quite near the place,and all walked on together.


Chapter 4

Varenka, with her white kerchief on her black hair, surrounded by thechildren, gaily and good-humoredly looking after them, and at the sametime visibly excited at the possibility of receiving a declaration fromthe man she cared for, was very attractive. Sergey Ivanovitch walkedbeside her, and never left off admiring her. Looking at her, he recalledall the delightful things he had heard from her lips, all the good heknew about her, and became more and more conscious that the feeling hehad for her was something special that he had felt long, long ago, andonly once, in his early youth. The feeling of happiness in being nearher continually grew, and at last reached such a point that, as he put ahuge, slender-stalked agaric fungus in her basket, he looked straightinto her face, and noticing the flush of glad and alarmed excitementthat overspread her face, he was confused himself, and smiled to her insilence a smile that said too much.
"If so," he said to himself, "I ought to think it over and make up mymind, and not give way like a boy to the impulse of a moment."
"I’m going to pick by myself apart from all the rest, or else my effortswill make no show," he said, and he left the edge of the forest wherethey were walking on low silky grass between old birch trees standingfar apart, and went more into the heart of the wood, where between thewhite birch trunks there were gray trunks of aspen and dark bushes ofhazel. Walking some forty paces away, Sergey Ivanovitch, knowing he wasout of sight, stood still behind a bushy spindle-tree in full flowerwith its rosy red catkins. It was perfectly still all round him. Onlyoverhead in the birches under which he stood, the flies, like a swarm ofbees, buzzed unceasingly, and from time to time the children’s voiceswere floated across to him. All at once he heard, not far from the edgeof the wood, the sound of Varenka’s contralto voice, calling Grisha, anda smile of delight passed over Sergey Ivanovitch’s face. Conscious ofthis smile, he shook his head disapprovingly at his own condition, andtaking out a cigar, he began lighting it. For a long while he could notget a match to light against the trunk of a birch tree. The soft scalesof the white bark rubbed off the phosphorus, and the light went out. Atlast one of the matches burned, and the fragrant cigar smoke, hoveringuncertainly in flat, wide coils, stretched away forwards and upwardsover a bush under the overhanging branches of a birch tree. Watching thestreak of smoke, Sergey Ivanovitch walked gently on, deliberating on hisposition.
"Why not?" he thought. "If it were only a passing fancy or a passion, ifit were only this attraction—this mutual attraction (I can call it a_mutual_ attraction), but if I felt that it was in contradiction withthe whole bent of my life—if I felt that in giving way to thisattraction I should be false to my vocation and my duty ... but it’s notso. The only thing I can say against it is that, when I lost Marie, Isaid to myself that I would remain faithful to her memory. That’s theonly thing I can say against my feeling.... That’s a great thing,"Sergey Ivanovitch said to himself, feeling at the same time that thisconsideration had not the slightest importance for him personally, butwould only perhaps detract from his romantic character in the eyes ofothers. "But apart from that, however much I searched, I should neverfind anything to say against my feeling. If I were choosing byconsiderations of suitability alone, I could not have found anythingbetter."
However many women and girls he thought of whom he knew, he could notthink of a girl who united to such a degree all, positively all, thequalities he would wish to see in his wife. She had all the charm andfreshness of youth, but she was not a child; and if she loved him, sheloved him consciously as a woman ought to love; that was one thing.Another point: she was not only far from being worldly, but had anunmistakable distaste for worldly society, and at the same time she knewthe world, and had all the ways of a woman of the best society, whichwere absolutely essential to Sergey Ivanovitch’s conception of the womanwho was to share his life. Thirdly: she was religious, and not like achild, unconsciously religious and good, as Kitty, for example, was, buther life was founded on religious principles. Even in trifling matters,Sergey Ivanovitch found in her all that he wanted in his wife: she waspoor and alone in the world, so she would not bring with her a mass ofrelations and their influence into her husband’s house, as he saw now inKitty’s case. She would owe everything to her husband, which was what hehad always desired too for his future family life. And this girl, whounited all these qualities, loved him. He was a modest man, but he couldnot help seeing it. And he loved her. There was one considerationagainst it—his age. But he came of a long-lived family, he had not asingle gray hair, no one would have taken him for forty, and heremembered Varenka’s saying that it was only in Russia that men of fiftythought themselves old, and that in France a man of fifty considershimself _dans la force de l’âge_, while a man of forty is _un jeunehomme_. But what did the mere reckoning of years matter when he felt asyoung in heart as he had been twenty years ago? Was it not youth to feelas he felt now, when coming from the other side to the edge of the woodhe saw in the glowing light of the slanting sunbeams the gracious figureof Varenka in her yellow gown with her basket, walking lightly by thetrunk of an old birch tree, and when this impression of the sight ofVarenka blended so harmoniously with the beauty of the view, of theyellow oatfield lying bathed in the slanting sunshine, and beyond it thedistant ancient forest flecked with yellow and melting into the blue ofthe distance? His heart throbbed joyously. A softened feeling came overhim. He felt that he had made up his mind. Varenka, who had justcrouched down to pick a mushroom, rose with a supple movement and lookedround. Flinging away the cigar, Sergey Ivanovitch advanced with resolutesteps towards her.


Chapter 5

"Varvara Andreevna, when I was very young, I set before myself the idealof the woman I loved and should be happy to call my wife. I have livedthrough a long life, and now for the first time I have met what Isought—in you. I love you, and offer you my hand."
Sergey Ivanovitch was saying this to himself while he was ten paces fromVarvara. Kneeling down, with her hands over the mushrooms to guard themfrom Grisha, she was calling little Masha.
"Come here, little ones! There are so many!" she was saying in hersweet, deep voice.
Seeing Sergey Ivanovitch approaching, she did not get up and did notchange her position, but everything told him that she felt his presenceand was glad of it.
"Well, did you find some?" she asked from under the white kerchief,turning her handsome, gently smiling face to him.
"Not one," said Sergey Ivanovitch. "Did you?"
She did not answer, busy with the children who thronged about her.
"That one too, near the twig," she pointed out to little Masha a littlefungus, split in half across its rosy cap by the dry grass from underwhich it thrust itself. Varenka got up while Masha picked the fungus,breaking it into two white halves. "This brings back my childhood," sheadded, moving apart from the children beside Sergey Ivanovitch.
They walked on for some steps in silence. Varenka saw that he wanted tospeak; she guessed of what, and felt faint with joy and panic. They hadwalked so far away that no one could hear them now, but still he did notbegin to speak. It would have been better for Varenka to be silent.After a silence it would have been easier for them to say what theywanted to say than after talking about mushrooms. But against her ownwill, as it were accidentally, Varenka said:
"So you found nothing? In the middle of the wood there are always fewer,though." Sergey Ivanovitch sighed and made no answer. He was annoyedthat she had spoken about the mushrooms. He wanted to bring her back tothe first words she had uttered about her childhood; but after a pauseof some length, as though against his own will, he made an observationin response to her last words.
"I have heard that the white edible funguses are found principally atthe edge of the wood, though I can’t tell them apart."
Some minutes more passed, they moved still further away from thechildren, and were quite alone. Varenka’s heart throbbed so that sheheard it beating, and felt that she was turning red and pale and redagain.
To be the wife of a man like Koznishev, after her position with MadameStahl, was to her imagination the height of happiness. Besides, she wasalmost certain that she was in love with him. And this moment it wouldhave to be decided. She felt frightened. She dreaded both his speakingand his not speaking.
Now or never it must be said—that Sergey Ivanovitch felt too. Everythingin the expression, the flushed cheeks and the downcast eyes of Varenkabetrayed a painful suspense. Sergey Ivanovitch saw it and felt sorry forher. He felt even that to say nothing now would be a slight to her.Rapidly in his own mind he ran over all the arguments in support of hisdecision. He even said over to himself the words in which he meant toput his offer, but instead of those words, some utterly unexpectedreflection that occurred to him made him ask:
"What is the difference between the ‘birch’ mushroom and the ‘white’mushroom?"
Varenka’s lips quivered with emotion as she answered:
"In the top part there is scarcely any difference, it’s in the stalk."
And as soon as these words were uttered, both he and she felt that itwas over, that what was to have been said would not be said; and theiremotion, which had up to then been continually growing more intense,began to subside.
"The birch mushroom’s stalk suggests a dark man’s chin after two dayswithout shaving," said Sergey Ivanovitch, speaking quite calmly now.
"Yes, that’s true," answered Varenka smiling, and unconsciously thedirection of their walk changed. They began to turn towards thechildren. Varenka felt both sore and ashamed; at the same time she had asense of relief.
When he had got home again and went over the whole subject, SergeyIvanovitch thought his previous decision had been a mistaken one. Hecould not be false to the memory of Marie.
"Gently, children, gently!" Levin shouted quite angrily to the children,standing before his wife to protect her when the crowd of children flewwith shrieks of delight to meet them.
Behind the children Sergey Ivanovitch and Varenka walked out of thewood. Kitty had no need to ask Varenka; she saw from the calm andsomewhat crestfallen faces of both that her plans had not come off.
"Well?" her husband questioned her as they were going home again.
"It doesn’t bite," said Kitty, her smile and manner of speakingrecalling her father, a likeness Levin often noticed with pleasure.
"How doesn’t bite?"
"I’ll show you," she said, taking her husband’s hand, lifting it to hermouth, and just faintly brushing it with closed lips. "Like a kiss on apriest’s hand."
"Which didn’t it bite with?" he said, laughing.
"Both. But it should have been like this..."
"There are some peasants coming..."
"Oh, they didn’t see."


Chapter 6

During the time of the children’s tea the grown-up people sat in thebalcony and talked as though nothing had happened, though they all,especially Sergey Ivanovitch and Varenka, were very well aware thatthere had happened an event which, though negative, was of very greatimportance. They both had the same feeling, rather like that of aschoolboy after an examination, which has left him in the same class orshut him out of the school forever. Everyone present, feeling too thatsomething had happened, talked eagerly about extraneous subjects. Levinand Kitty were particularly happy and conscious of their love thatevening. And their happiness in their love seemed to imply adisagreeable slur on those who would have liked to feel the same andcould not—and they felt a prick of conscience.
"Mark my words, Alexander will not come," said the old princess.
That evening they were expecting Stepan Arkadyevitch to come down bytrain, and the old prince had written that possibly he might come too.
"And I know why," the princess went on; "he says that young people oughtto be left alone for a while at first."
"But papa has left us alone. We’ve never seen him," said Kitty."Besides, we’re not young people!—we’re old, married people by now."
"Only if he doesn’t come, I shall say good-bye to you children," saidthe princess, sighing mournfully.
"What nonsense, mamma!" both the daughters fell upon her at once.
"How do you suppose he is feeling? Why, now..."
And suddenly there was an unexpected quiver in the princess’s voice. Herdaughters were silent, and looked at one another. "Maman always findssomething to be miserable about," they said in that glance. They did notknow that happy as the princess was in her daughter’s house, and usefulas she felt herself to be there, she had been extremely miserable, bothon her own account and her husband’s, ever since they had married theirlast and favorite daughter, and the old home had been left empty.
"What is it, Agafea Mihalovna?" Kitty asked suddenly of AgafeaMihalovna, who was standing with a mysterious air, and a face full ofmeaning.
"About supper."
"Well, that’s right," said Dolly; "you go and arrange about it, and I’llgo and hear Grisha repeat his lesson, or else he will have nothing doneall day."
"That’s my lesson! No, Dolly, I’m going," said Levin, jumping up.
Grisha, who was by now at a high school, had to go over the lessons ofthe term in the summer holidays. Darya Alexandrovna, who had beenstudying Latin with her son in Moscow before, had made it a rule oncoming to the Levins’ to go over with him, at least once a day, the mostdifficult lessons of Latin and arithmetic. Levin had offered to take herplace, but the mother, having once overheard Levin’s lesson, andnoticing that it was not given exactly as the teacher in Moscow hadgiven it, said resolutely, though with much embarrassment and anxietynot to mortify Levin, that they must keep strictly to the book as theteacher had done, and that she had better undertake it again herself.Levin was amazed both at Stepan Arkadyevitch, who, by neglecting hisduty, threw upon the mother the supervision of studies of which she hadno comprehension, and at the teachers for teaching the children sobadly. But he promised his sister-in-law to give the lessons exactly asshe wished. And he went on teaching Grisha, not in his own way, but bythe book, and so took little interest in it, and often forgot the hourof the lesson. So it had been today.
"No, I’m going, Dolly, you sit still," he said. "We’ll do it allproperly, like the book. Only when Stiva comes, and we go out shooting,then we shall have to miss it."
And Levin went to Grisha.
Varenka was saying the same thing to Kitty. Even in the happy,well-ordered household of the Levins Varenka had succeeded in makingherself useful.
"I’ll see to the supper, you sit still," she said, and got up to go toAgafea Mihalovna.
"Yes, yes, most likely they’ve not been able to get chickens. If so,ours..."
"Agafea Mihalovna and I will see about it," and Varenka vanished withher.
"What a nice girl!" said the princess.
"Not nice, maman; she’s an exquisite girl; there’s no one else likeher."
"So you are expecting Stepan Arkadyevitch today?" said SergeyIvanovitch, evidently not disposed to pursue the conversation aboutVarenka. "It would be difficult to find two sons-in-law more unlike thanyours," he said with a subtle smile. "One all movement, only living insociety, like a fish in water; the other our Kostya, lively, alert,quick in everything, but as soon as he is in society, he either sinksinto apathy, or struggles helplessly like a fish on land."
"Yes, he’s very heedless," said the princess, addressing SergeyIvanovitch. "I’ve been meaning, indeed, to ask you to tell him that it’sout of the question for her" (she indicated Kitty) "to stay here; thatshe positively must come to Moscow. He talks of getting a doctordown..."
"Maman, he’ll do everything; he has agreed to everything," Kitty said,angry with her mother for appealing to Sergey Ivanovitch to judge insuch a matter.
In the middle of their conversation they heard the snorting of horsesand the sound of wheels on the gravel. Dolly had not time to get up togo and meet her husband, when from the window of the room below, whereGrisha was having his lesson, Levin leaped out and helped Grisha outafter him.
"It’s Stiva!" Levin shouted from under the balcony. "We’ve finished,Dolly, don’t be afraid!" he added, and started running like a boy tomeet the carriage.
"_Is ea id, ejus, ejus, ejus!_" shouted Grisha, skipping along theavenue.
"And some one else too! Papa, of course!" cried Levin, stopping at theentrance of the avenue. "Kitty, don’t come down the steep staircase, goround."
But Levin had been mistaken in taking the person sitting in the carriagefor the old prince. As he got nearer to the carriage he saw besideStepan Arkadyevitch not the prince but a handsome, stout young man in aScotch cap, with long ends of ribbon behind. This was VassenkaVeslovsky, a distant cousin of the Shtcherbatskys, a brilliant younggentleman in Petersburg and Moscow society. "A capital fellow, and akeen sportsman," as Stepan Arkadyevitch said, introducing him.
Not a whit abashed by the disappointment caused by his having come inplace of the old prince, Veslovsky greeted Levin gaily, claimingacquaintance with him in the past, and snatching up Grisha into thecarriage, lifted him over the pointer that Stepan Arkadyevitch hadbrought with him.
Levin did not get into the carriage, but walked behind. He was rathervexed at the non-arrival of the old prince, whom he liked more and morethe more he saw of him, and also at the arrival of this VassenkaVeslovsky, a quite uncongenial and superfluous person. He seemed to himstill more uncongenial and superfluous when, on approaching the stepswhere the whole party, children and grown-up, were gathered together inmuch excitement, Levin saw Vassenka Veslovsky, with a particularly warmand gallant air, kissing Kitty’s hand.
"Your wife and I are cousins and very old friends," said VassenkaVeslovsky, once more shaking Levin’s hand with great warmth.
"Well, are there plenty of birds?" Stepan Arkadyevitch said to Levin,hardly leaving time for everyone to utter their greetings. "We’ve comewith the most savage intentions. Why, maman, they’ve not been in Moscowsince! Look, Tanya, here’s something for you! Get it, please, it’s inthe carriage, behind!" he talked in all directions. "How pretty you’vegrown, Dolly," he said to his wife, once more kissing her hand, holdingit in one of his, and patting it with the other.
Levin, who a minute before had been in the happiest frame of mind, nowlooked darkly at everyone, and everything displeased him.
"Who was it he kissed yesterday with those lips?" he thought, looking atStepan Arkadyevitch’s tender demonstrations to his wife. He looked atDolly, and he did not like her either.
"She doesn’t believe in his love. So what is she so pleased about?Revolting!" thought Levin.
He looked at the princess, who had been so dear to him a minute before,and he did not like the manner in which she welcomed this Vassenka, withhis ribbons, just as though she were in her own house.
Even Sergey Ivanovitch, who had come out too onto the steps, seemed tohim unpleasant with the show of cordiality with which he met StepanArkadyevitch, though Levin knew that his brother neither liked norrespected Oblonsky.
And Varenka, even she seemed hateful, with her air _sainte nitouche_making the acquaintance of this gentleman, while all the while she wasthinking of nothing but getting married.
And more hateful than anyone was Kitty for falling in with the tone ofgaiety with which this gentleman regarded his visit in the country, asthough it were a holiday for himself and everyone else. And, above all,unpleasant was that particular smile with which she responded to hissmile.
Noisily talking, they all went into the house; but as soon as they wereall seated, Levin turned and went out.
Kitty saw something was wrong with her husband. She tried to seize amoment to speak to him alone, but he made haste to get away from her,saying he was wanted at the counting-house. It was long since his ownwork on the estate had seemed to him so important as at that moment."It’s all holiday for them," he thought; "but these are no holidaymatters, they won’t wait, and there’s no living without them."


Chapter 7

Levin came back to the house only when they sent to summon him tosupper. On the stairs were standing Kitty and Agafea Mihalovna,consulting about wines for supper.
"But why are you making all this fuss? Have what we usually do."
"No, Stiva doesn’t drink ... Kostya, stop, what’s the matter?" Kittybegan, hurrying after him, but he strode ruthlessly away to the diningroom without waiting for her, and at once joined in the lively generalconversation which was being maintained there by Vassenka Veslovsky andStepan Arkadyevitch.
"Well, what do you say, are we going shooting tomorrow?" said StepanArkadyevitch.
"Please, do let’s go," said Veslovsky, moving to another chair, where hesat down sideways, with one fat leg crossed under him.
"I shall be delighted, we will go. And have you had any shooting yetthis year?" said Levin to Veslovsky, looking intently at his leg, butspeaking with that forced amiability that Kitty knew so well in him, andthat was so out of keeping with him. "I can’t answer for our findinggrouse, but there are plenty of snipe. Only we ought to start early.You’re not tired? Aren’t you tired, Stiva?"
"Me tired? I’ve never been tired yet. Suppose we stay up all night.Let’s go for a walk!"
"Yes, really, let’s not go to bed at all! Capital!" Veslovsky chimed in.
"Oh, we all know you can do without sleep, and keep other people uptoo," Dolly said to her husband, with that faint note of irony in hervoice which she almost always had now with her husband. "But to mythinking, it’s time for bed now.... I’m going, I don’t want supper."
"No, do stay a little, Dolly," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, going round toher side behind the table where they were having supper. "I’ve so muchstill to tell you."
"Nothing really, I suppose."
"Do you know Veslovsky has been at Anna’s, and he’s going to them again?You know they’re hardly fifty miles from you, and I too must certainlygo over there. Veslovsky, come here!"
Vassenka crossed over to the ladies, and sat down beside Kitty.
"Ah, do tell me, please; you have stayed with her? How was she?" DaryaAlexandrovna appealed to him.
Levin was left at the other end of the table, and though never pausingin his conversation with the princess and Varenka, he saw that there wasan eager and mysterious conversation going on between StepanArkadyevitch, Dolly, Kitty, and Veslovsky. And that was not all. He sawon his wife’s face an expression of real feeling as she gazed with fixedeyes on the handsome face of Vassenka, who was telling them somethingwith great animation.
"It’s exceedingly nice at their place," Veslovsky was telling them aboutVronsky and Anna. "I can’t, of course, take it upon myself to judge, butin their house you feel the real feeling of home."
"What do they intend doing?"
"I believe they think of going to Moscow."
"How jolly it would be for us all to go over to them together! When areyou going there?" Stepan Arkadyevitch asked Vassenka.
"I’m spending July there."
"Will you go?" Stepan Arkadyevitch said to his wife.
"I’ve been wanting to a long while; I shall certainly go," said Dolly."I am sorry for her, and I know her. She’s a splendid woman. I will goalone, when you go back, and then I shall be in no one’s way. And itwill be better indeed without you."
"To be sure," said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "And you, Kitty?"
"I? Why should I go?" Kitty said, flushing all over, and she glancedround at her husband.
"Do you know Anna Arkadyevna, then?" Veslovsky asked her. "She’s a veryfascinating woman."
"Yes," she answered Veslovsky, crimsoning still more. She got up andwalked across to her husband.
"Are you going shooting, then, tomorrow?" she said.
His jealousy had in these few moments, especially at the flush that hadoverspread her cheeks while she was talking to Veslovsky, gone farindeed. Now as he heard her words, he construed them in his own fashion.Strange as it was to him afterwards to recall it, it seemed to him atthe moment clear that in asking whether he was going shooting, all shecared to know was whether he would give that pleasure to VassenkaVeslovsky, with whom, as he fancied, she was in love.
"Yes, I’m going," he answered her in an unnatural voice, disagreeable tohimself.
"No, better spend the day here tomorrow, or Dolly won’t see anything ofher husband, and set off the day after," said Kitty.
The motive of Kitty’s words was interpreted by Levin thus: "Don’tseparate me from _him_. I don’t care about _your_ going, but do let meenjoy the society of this delightful young man."
"Oh, if you wish, we’ll stay here tomorrow," Levin answered, withpeculiar amiability.
Vassenka meanwhile, utterly unsuspecting the misery his presence hadoccasioned, got up from the table after Kitty, and watching her withsmiling and admiring eyes, he followed her.
Levin saw that look. He turned white, and for a minute he could hardlybreathe. "How dare he look at my wife like that!" was the feeling thatboiled within him.
"Tomorrow, then? Do, please, let us go," said Vassenka, sitting down ona chair, and again crossing his leg as his habit was.
Levin’s jealousy went further still. Already he saw himself a deceivedhusband, looked upon by his wife and her lover as simply necessary toprovide them with the conveniences and pleasures of life.... But inspite of that he made polite and hospitable inquiries of Vassenka abouthis shooting, his gun, and his boots, and agreed to go shooting nextday.
Happily for Levin, the old princess cut short his agonies by getting upherself and advising Kitty to go to bed. But even at this point Levincould not escape another agony. As he said good-night to his hostess,Vassenka would again have kissed her hand, but Kitty, reddening, drewback her hand and said with a naïve bluntness, for which the oldprincess scolded her afterwards:
"We don’t like that fashion."
In Levin’s eyes she was to blame for having allowed such relations toarise, and still more to blame for showing so awkwardly that she did notlike them.
"Why, how can one want to go to bed!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, who,after drinking several glasses of wine at supper, was now in his mostcharming and sentimental humor. "Look, Kitty," he said, pointing to themoon, which had just risen behind the lime trees—"how exquisite!Veslovsky, this is the time for a serenade. You know, he has a splendidvoice; we practiced songs together along the road. He has brought somelovely songs with him, two new ones. Varvara Andreevna and he must singsome duets."
When the party had broken up, Stepan Arkadyevitch walked a long whileabout the avenue with Veslovsky; their voices could be heard singing oneof the new songs.
Levin hearing these voices sat scowling in an easy-chair in his wife’sbedroom, and maintained an obstinate silence when she asked him what waswrong. But when at last with a timid glance she hazarded the question:"Was there perhaps something you disliked about Veslovsky?"—it all burstout, and he told her all. He was humiliated himself at what he wassaying, and that exasperated him all the more.
He stood facing her with his eyes glittering menacingly under hisscowling brows, and he squeezed his strong arms across his chest, asthough he were straining every nerve to hold himself in. The expressionof his face would have been grim, and even cruel, if it had not at thesame time had a look of suffering which touched her. His jaws weretwitching, and his voice kept breaking.
"You must understand that I’m not jealous, that’s a nasty word. I can’tbe jealous, and believe that.... I can’t say what I feel, but this isawful.... I’m not jealous, but I’m wounded, humiliated that anybody darethink, that anybody dare look at you with eyes like that."
"Eyes like what?" said Kitty, trying as conscientiously as possible torecall every word and gesture of that evening and every shade implied inthem.
At the very bottom of her heart she did think there had been somethingprecisely at the moment when he had crossed over after her to the otherend of the table; but she dared not own it even to herself, and wouldhave been even more unable to bring herself to say so to him, and soincrease his suffering.
"And what can there possibly be attractive about me as I am now?..."
"Ah!" he cried, clutching at his head, "you shouldn’t say that!... Ifyou had been attractive then..."
"Oh, no, Kostya, oh, wait a minute, oh, do listen!" she said, looking athim with an expression of pained commiseration. "Why, what can you bethinking about! When for me there’s no one in the world, no one, noone!... Would you like me never to see anyone?"
For the first minute she had been offended at his jealousy; she wasangry that the slightest amusement, even the most innocent, should beforbidden her; but now she would readily have sacrificed, not merelysuch trifles, but everything, for his peace of mind, to save him fromthe agony he was suffering.
"You must understand the horror and comedy of my position," he went onin a desperate whisper; "that he’s in my house, that he’s done nothingimproper positively except his free and easy airs and the way he sits onhis legs. He thinks it’s the best possible form, and so I’m obliged tobe civil to him."
"But, Kostya, you’re exaggerating," said Kitty, at the bottom of herheart rejoicing at the depth of his love for her, shown now in hisjealousy.
"The most awful part of it all is that you’re just as you always are,and especially now when to me you’re something sacred, and we’re sohappy, so particularly happy—and all of a sudden a little wretch....He’s not a little wretch; why should I abuse him? I have nothing to dowith him. But why should my, and your, happiness..."
"Do you know, I understand now what it’s all come from," Kitty wasbeginning.
"Well, what? what?"
"I saw how you looked while we were talking at supper."
"Well, well!" Levin said in dismay.
She told him what they had been talking about. And as she told him, shewas breathless with emotion. Levin was silent for a space, then hescanned her pale and distressed face, and suddenly he clutched at hishead.
"Katya, I’ve been worrying you! Darling, forgive me! It’s madness!Katya, I’m a criminal. And how could you be so distressed at suchidiocy?"
"Oh, I was sorry for you."
"For me? for me? How mad I am!... But why make you miserable? It’s awfulto think that any outsider can shatter our happiness."
"It’s humiliating too, of course."
"Oh, then I’ll keep him here all the summer, and will overwhelm him withcivility," said Levin, kissing her hands. "You shall see. Tomorrow....Oh, yes, we are going tomorrow."


Chapter 8

Next day, before the ladies were up, the wagonette and a trap for theshooting party were at the door, and Laska, aware since early morningthat they were going shooting, after much whining and darting to andfro, had sat herself down in the wagonette beside the coachman, and,disapproving of the delay, was excitedly watching the door from whichthe sportsmen still did not come out. The first to come out was VassenkaVeslovsky, in new high boots that reached half-way up his thick thighs,in a green blouse, with a new Russian leather cartridge-belt, and in hisScotch cap with ribbons, with a brand-new English gun without a sling.Laska flew up to him, welcomed him, and jumping up, asked him in her ownway whether the others were coming soon, but getting no answer from him,she returned to her post of observation and sank into repose again, herhead on one side, and one ear pricked up to listen. At last the dooropened with a creak, and Stepan Arkadyevitch’s spot-and-tan pointer Krakflew out, running round and round and turning over in the air. StepanArkadyevitch himself followed with a gun in his hand and a cigar in hismouth.
"Good dog, good dog, Krak!" he cried encouragingly to the dog, who puthis paws up on his chest, catching at his game bag. Stepan Arkadyevitchwas dressed in rough leggings and spats, in torn trousers and a shortcoat. On his head there was a wreck of a hat of indefinite form, but hisgun of a new patent was a perfect gem, and his game bag and cartridgebelt, though worn, were of the very best quality.
Vassenka Veslovsky had had no notion before that it was truly _chic_ fora sportsman to be in tatters, but to have his shooting outfit of thebest quality. He saw it now as he looked at Stepan Arkadyevitch, radiantin his rags, graceful, well-fed, and joyous, a typical Russian nobleman.And he made up his mind that next time he went shooting he wouldcertainly adopt the same get-up.
"Well, and what about our host?" he asked.
"A young wife," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling.
"Yes, and such a charming one!"
"He came down dressed. No doubt he’s run up to her again."
Stepan Arkadyevitch guessed right. Levin had run up again to his wife toask her once more if she forgave him for his idiocy yesterday, and,moreover, to beg her for Christ’s sake to be more careful. The greatthing was for her to keep away from the children—they might any minutepush against her. Then he had once more to hear her declare that she wasnot angry with him for going away for two days, and to beg her to besure to send him a note next morning by a servant on horseback, to writehim, if it were but two words only, to let him know that all was wellwith her.
Kitty was distressed, as she always was, at parting for a couple of daysfrom her husband, but when she saw his eager figure, looking big andstrong in his shooting-boots and his white blouse, and a sort ofsportsman elation and excitement incomprehensible to her, she forgot herown chagrin for the sake of his pleasure, and said good-bye to himcheerfully.
"Pardon, gentlemen!" he said, running out onto the steps. "Have you putthe lunch in? Why is the chestnut on the right? Well, it doesn’t matter.Laska, down; go and lie down!"
"Put it with the herd of oxen," he said to the herdsman, who was waitingfor him at the steps with some question. "Excuse me, here comes anothervillain."
Levin jumped out of the wagonette, in which he had already taken hisseat, to meet the carpenter, who came towards the steps with a rule inhis hand.
"You didn’t come to the counting house yesterday, and now you’redetaining me. Well, what is it?"
"Would your honor let me make another turning? It’s only three steps toadd. And we make it just fit at the same time. It will be much moreconvenient."
"You should have listened to me," Levin answered with annoyance. "Isaid: Put the lines and then fit in the steps. Now there’s no setting itright. Do as I told you, and make a new staircase."
The point was that in the lodge that was being built the carpenter hadspoiled the staircase, fitting it together without calculating the spaceit was to fill, so that the steps were all sloping when it was put inplace. Now the carpenter wanted, keeping the same staircase, to addthree steps.
"It will be much better."
"But where’s your staircase coming out with its three steps?"
"Why, upon my word, sir," the carpenter said with a contemptuous smile."It comes out right at the very spot. It starts, so to speak," he said,with a persuasive gesture; "it comes down, and comes down, and comesout."
"But three steps will add to the length too ... where is it to comeout?"
"Why, to be sure, it’ll start from the bottom and go up and go up, andcome out so," the carpenter said obstinately and convincingly.
"It’ll reach the ceiling and the wall."
"Upon my word! Why, it’ll go up, and up, and come out like this."
Levin took out a ramrod and began sketching him the staircase in thedust.
"There, do you see?"
"As your honor likes," said the carpenter, with a sudden gleam in hiseyes, obviously understanding the thing at last. "It seems it’ll be bestto make a new one."
"Well, then, do it as you’re told," Levin shouted, seating himself inthe wagonette. "Down! Hold the dogs, Philip!"
Levin felt now at leaving behind all his family and household cares suchan eager sense of joy in life and expectation that he was not disposedto talk. Besides that, he had that feeling of concentrated excitementthat every sportsman experiences as he approaches the scene of action.If he had anything on his mind at that moment, it was only the doubtwhether they would start anything in the Kolpensky marsh, whether Laskawould show to advantage in comparison with Krak, and whether he wouldshoot well that day himself. Not to disgrace himself before a newspectator—not to be outdone by Oblonsky—that too was a thought thatcrossed his brain.
Oblonsky was feeling the same, and he too was not talkative. VassenkaVeslovsky kept up alone a ceaseless flow of cheerful chatter. As helistened to him now, Levin felt ashamed to think how unfair he had beento him the day before. Vassenka was really a nice fellow, simple,good-hearted, and very good-humored. If Levin had met him before he wasmarried, he would have made friends with him. Levin rather disliked hisholiday attitude to life and a sort of free and easy assumption ofelegance. It was as though he assumed a high degree of importance inhimself that could not be disputed, because he had long nails and astylish cap, and everything else to correspond; but this could beforgiven for the sake of his good nature and good breeding. Levin likedhim for his good education, for speaking French and English with such anexcellent accent, and for being a man of his world.
Vassenka was extremely delighted with the left horse, a horse of the DonSteppes. He kept praising him enthusiastically. "How fine it must begalloping over the steppes on a steppe horse! Eh? isn’t it?" he said. Hehad imagined riding on a steppe horse as something wild and romantic,and it turned out nothing of the sort. But his simplicity, particularlyin conjunction with his good looks, his amiable smile, and the grace ofhis movements, was very attractive. Either because his nature wassympathetic to Levin, or because Levin was trying to atone for his sinsof the previous evening by seeing nothing but what was good in him,anyway he liked his society.
After they had driven over two miles from home, Veslovsky all at oncefelt for a cigar and his pocketbook, and did not know whether he hadlost them or left them on the table. In the pocketbook there werethirty-seven pounds, and so the matter could not be left in uncertainty.
"Do you know what, Levin, I’ll gallop home on that left trace-horse.That will be splendid. Eh?" he said, preparing to get out.
"No, why should you?" answered Levin, calculating that Vassenka couldhardly weigh less than seventeen stone. "I’ll send the coachman."
The coachman rode back on the trace-horse, and Levin himself drove theremaining pair.


Chapter 9

"Well, now what’s our plan of campaign? Tell us all about it," saidStepan Arkadyevitch.
"Our plan is this. Now we’re driving to Gvozdyov. In Gvozdyov there’s agrouse marsh on this side, and beyond Gvozdyov come some magnificentsnipe marshes where there are grouse too. It’s hot now, and we’ll getthere—it’s fifteen miles or so—towards evening and have some eveningshooting; we’ll spend the night there and go on tomorrow to the biggermoors."
"And is there nothing on the way?"
"Yes; but we’ll reserve ourselves; besides it’s hot. There are two nicelittle places, but I doubt there being anything to shoot."
Levin would himself have liked to go into these little places, but theywere near home; he could shoot them over any time, and they were onlylittle places—there would hardly be room for three to shoot. And so,with some insincerity, he said that he doubted there being anything toshoot. When they reached a little marsh Levin would have driven by, butStepan Arkadyevitch, with the experienced eye of a sportsman, at oncedetected reeds visible from the road.
"Shan’t we try that?" he said, pointing to the little marsh.
"Levin, do, please! how delightful!" Vassenka Veslovsky began begging,and Levin could but consent.
Before they had time to stop, the dogs had flown one before the otherinto the marsh.
"Krak! Laska!..."
The dogs came back.
"There won’t be room for three. I’ll stay here," said Levin, hoping theywould find nothing but peewits, who had been startled by the dogs, andturning over in their flight, were plaintively wailing over the marsh.
"No! Come along, Levin, let’s go together!" Veslovsky called.
"Really, there’s not room. Laska, back, Laska! You won’t want anotherdog, will you?"
Levin remained with the wagonette, and looked enviously at thesportsmen. They walked right across the marsh. Except little birds andpeewits, of which Vassenka killed one, there was nothing in the marsh.
"Come, you see now that it was not that I grudged the marsh," saidLevin, "only it’s wasting time."
"Oh, no, it was jolly all the same. Did you see us?" said VassenkaVeslovsky, clambering awkwardly into the wagonette with his gun and hispeewit in his hands. "How splendidly I shot this bird! Didn’t I? Well,shall we soon be getting to the real place?"
The horses started off suddenly, Levin knocked his head against thestock of someone’s gun, and there was the report of a shot. The gun didactually go off first, but that was how it seemed to Levin. It appearedthat Vassenka Veslovsky had pulled only one trigger, and had left theother hammer still cocked. The charge flew into the ground without doingharm to anyone. Stepan Arkadyevitch shook his head and laughedreprovingly at Veslovsky. But Levin had not the heart to reprove him. Inthe first place, any reproach would have seemed to be called forth bythe danger he had incurred and the bump that had come up on Levin’sforehead. And besides, Veslovsky was at first so naïvely distressed, andthen laughed so good-humoredly and infectiously at their general dismay,that one could not but laugh with him.
When they reached the second marsh, which was fairly large, and wouldinevitably take some time to shoot over, Levin tried to persuade them topass it by. But Veslovsky again overpersuaded him. Again, as the marshwas narrow, Levin, like a good host, remained with the carriage.
Krak made straight for some clumps of sedge. Vassenka Veslovsky was thefirst to run after the dog. Before Stepan Arkadyevitch had time to comeup, a grouse flew out. Veslovsky missed it and it flew into an unmownmeadow. This grouse was left for Veslovsky to follow up. Krak found itagain and pointed, and Veslovsky shot it and went back to the carriage."Now you go and I’ll stay with the horses," he said.
Levin had begun to feel the pangs of a sportsman’s envy. He handed thereins to Veslovsky and walked into the marsh.
Laska, who had been plaintively whining and fretting against theinjustice of her treatment, flew straight ahead to a hopeful place thatLevin knew well, and that Krak had not yet come upon.
"Why don’t you stop her?" shouted Stepan Arkadyevitch.
"She won’t scare them," answered Levin, sympathizing with his bitch’spleasure and hurrying after her.
As she came nearer and nearer to the familiar breeding places there wasmore and more earnestness in Laska’s exploration. A little marsh birddid not divert her attention for more than an instant. She made onecircuit round the clump of reeds, was beginning a second, and suddenlyquivered with excitement and became motionless.
"Come, come, Stiva!" shouted Levin, feeling his heart beginning to beatmore violently; and all of a sudden, as though some sort of shutter hadbeen drawn back from his straining ears, all sounds, confused but loud,began to beat on his hearing, losing all sense of distance. He heard thesteps of Stepan Arkadyevitch, mistaking them for the tramp of the horsesin the distance; he heard the brittle sound of the twigs on which he hadtrodden, taking this sound for the flying of a grouse. He heard too, notfar behind him, a splashing in the water, which he could not explain tohimself.
Picking his steps, he moved up to the dog.
"Fetch it!"
Not a grouse but a snipe flew up from beside the dog. Levin had liftedhis gun, but at the very instant when he was taking aim, the sound ofsplashing grew louder, came closer, and was joined with the sound ofVeslovsky’s voice, shouting something with strange loudness. Levin sawhe had his gun pointed behind the snipe, but still he fired.
When he had made sure he had missed, Levin looked round and saw thehorses and the wagonette not on the road but in the marsh.
Veslovsky, eager to see the shooting, had driven into the marsh, and gotthe horses stuck in the mud.
"Damn the fellow!" Levin said to himself, as he went back to thecarriage that had sunk in the mire. "What did you drive in for?" he saidto him dryly, and calling the coachman, he began pulling the horses out.
Levin was vexed both at being hindered from shooting and at his horsesgetting stuck in the mud, and still more at the fact that neither StepanArkadyevitch nor Veslovsky helped him and the coachman to unharness thehorses and get them out, since neither of them had the slightest notionof harnessing. Without vouchsafing a syllable in reply to Vassenka’sprotestations that it had been quite dry there, Levin worked in silencewith the coachman at extricating the horses. But then, as he got warm atthe work and saw how assiduously Veslovsky was tugging at the wagonetteby one of the mud-guards, so that he broke it indeed, Levin blamedhimself for having under the influence of yesterday’s feelings been toocold to Veslovsky, and tried to be particularly genial so as to smoothover his chilliness. When everything had been put right, and thecarriage had been brought back to the road, Levin had the lunch served.
"_Bon appétit—bonne conscience! Ce poulet va tomber jusqu’au fond de mesbottes_," Vassenka, who had recovered his spirits, quoted the Frenchsaying as he finished his second chicken. "Well, now our troubles areover, now everything’s going to go well. Only, to atone for my sins, I’mbound to sit on the box. That’s so? eh? No, no! I’ll be your Automedon.You shall see how I’ll get you along," he answered, not letting go therein, when Levin begged him to let the coachman drive. "No, I must atonefor my sins, and I’m very comfortable on the box." And he drove.
Levin was a little afraid he would exhaust the horses, especially thechestnut, whom he did not know how to hold in; but unconsciously he fellunder the influence of his gaiety and listened to the songs he sang allthe way on the box, or the descriptions and representations he gave ofdriving in the English fashion, four-in-hand; and it was in the verybest of spirits that after lunch they drove to the Gvozdyov marsh.


Chapter 10

Vassenka drove the horses so smartly that they reached the marsh tooearly, while it was still hot.
As they drew near this more important marsh, the chief aim of theirexpedition, Levin could not help considering how he could get rid ofVassenka and be free in his movements. Stepan Arkadyevitch evidently hadthe same desire, and on his face Levin saw the look of anxiety alwayspresent in a true sportsman when beginning shooting, together with acertain good-humored slyness peculiar to him.
"How shall we go? It’s a splendid marsh, I see, and there are hawks,"said Stepan Arkadyevitch, pointing to two great birds hovering over thereeds. "Where there are hawks, there is sure to be game."
"Now, gentlemen," said Levin, pulling up his boots and examining thelock of his gun with rather a gloomy expression, "do you see thosereeds?" He pointed to an oasis of blackish green in the huge half-mownwet meadow that stretched along the right bank of the river. "The marshbegins here, straight in front of us, do you see—where it is greener?From here it runs to the right where the horses are; there are breedingplaces there, and grouse, and all round those reeds as far as thatalder, and right up to the mill. Over there, do you see, where the poolsare? That’s the best place. There I once shot seventeen snipe. We’llseparate with the dogs and go in different directions, and then meetover there at the mill."
"Well, which shall go to left and which to right?" asked StepanArkadyevitch. "It’s wider to the right; you two go that way and I’lltake the left," he said with apparent carelessness.
"Capital! we’ll make the bigger bag! Yes, come along, come along!"Vassenka exclaimed.
Levin could do nothing but agree, and they divided.
As soon as they entered the marsh, the two dogs began hunting abouttogether and made towards the green, slime-covered pool. Levin knewLaska’s method, wary and indefinite; he knew the place too and expecteda whole covey of snipe.
"Veslovsky, beside me, walk beside me!" he said in a faint voice to hiscompanion splashing in the water behind him. Levin could not helpfeeling an interest in the direction his gun was pointed, after thatcasual shot near the Kolpensky marsh.
"Oh, I won’t get in your way, don’t trouble about me."
But Levin could not help troubling, and recalled Kitty’s words atparting: "Mind you don’t shoot one another." The dogs came nearer andnearer, passed each other, each pursuing its own scent. The expectationof snipe was so intense that to Levin the squelching sound of his ownheel, as he drew it up out of the mire, seemed to be the call of asnipe, and he clutched and pressed the lock of his gun.
"Bang! bang!" sounded almost in his ear. Vassenka had fired at a flockof ducks which was hovering over the marsh and flying at that momenttowards the sportsmen, far out of range. Before Levin had time to lookround, there was the whir of one snipe, another, a third, and some eightmore rose one after another.
Stepan Arkadyevitch hit one at the very moment when it was beginning itszigzag movements, and the snipe fell in a heap into the mud. Oblonskyaimed deliberately at another, still flying low in the reeds, andtogether with the report of the shot, that snipe too fell, and it couldbe seen fluttering out where the sedge had been cut, its unhurt wingshowing white beneath.
Levin was not so lucky: he aimed at his first bird too low, and missed;he aimed at it again, just as it was rising, but at that instant anothersnipe flew up at his very feet, distracting him so that he missed again.
While they were loading their guns, another snipe rose, and Veslovsky,who had had time to load again, sent two charges of small-shot into thewater. Stepan Arkadyevitch picked up his snipe, and with sparkling eyeslooked at Levin.
"Well, now let us separate," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, and limping onhis left foot, holding his gun in readiness and whistling to his dog, hewalked off in one direction. Levin and Veslovsky walked in the other.
It always happened with Levin that when his first shots were a failurehe got hot and out of temper, and shot badly the whole day. So it wasthat day. The snipe showed themselves in numbers. They kept flying upfrom just under the dogs, from under the sportsmen’s legs, and Levinmight have retrieved his ill luck. But the more he shot, the more hefelt disgraced in the eyes of Veslovsky, who kept popping away merrilyand indiscriminately, killing nothing, and not in the slightest abashedby his ill success. Levin, in feverish haste, could not restrainhimself, got more and more out of temper, and ended by shooting almostwithout a hope of hitting. Laska, indeed, seemed to understand this. Shebegan looking more languidly, and gazed back at the sportsmen, as itwere, with perplexity or reproach in her eyes. Shots followed shots inrapid succession. The smoke of the powder hung about the sportsmen,while in the great roomy net of the game bag there were only three lightlittle snipe. And of these one had been killed by Veslovsky alone, andone by both of them together. Meanwhile from the other side of the marshcame the sound of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s shots, not frequent, but, asLevin fancied, well-directed, for almost after each they heard "Krak,Krak, _apporte_!"
This excited Levin still more. The snipe were floating continually inthe air over the reeds. Their whirring wings close to the earth, andtheir harsh cries high in the air, could be heard on all sides; thesnipe that had risen first and flown up into the air, settled againbefore the sportsmen. Instead of two hawks there were now dozens of themhovering with shrill cries over the marsh.
After walking through the larger half of the marsh, Levin and Veslovskyreached the place where the peasants’ mowing-grass was divided into longstrips reaching to the reeds, marked off in one place by the trampledgrass, in another by a path mown through it. Half of these strips hadalready been mown.
Though there was not so much hope of finding birds in the uncut part asthe cut part, Levin had promised Stepan Arkadyevitch to meet him, and sohe walked on with his companion through the cut and uncut patches.
"Hi, sportsmen!" shouted one of a group of peasants, sitting on anunharnessed cart; "come and have some lunch with us! Have a drop ofwine!"
Levin looked round.
"Come along, it’s all right!" shouted a good-humored-looking beardedpeasant with a red face, showing his white teeth in a grin, and holdingup a greenish bottle that flashed in the sunlight.
"_Qu’est-ce qu’ils disent_?" asked Veslovsky.
"They invite you to have some vodka. Most likely they’ve been dividingthe meadow into lots. I should have some," said Levin, not without someguile, hoping Veslovsky would be tempted by the vodka, and would go awayto them.
"Why do they offer it?"
"Oh, they’re merry-making. Really, you should join them. You would beinterested."
"_Allons, c’est curieux_."
"You go, you go, you’ll find the way to the mill!" cried Levin, andlooking round he perceived with satisfaction that Veslovsky, bent andstumbling with weariness, holding his gun out at arm’s length, wasmaking his way out of the marsh towards the peasants.
"You come too!" the peasants shouted to Levin. "Never fear! You tasteour cake!"
Levin felt a strong inclination to drink a little vodka and to eat somebread. He was exhausted, and felt it a great effort to drag hisstaggering legs out of the mire, and for a minute he hesitated. ButLaska was setting. And immediately all his weariness vanished, and hewalked lightly through the swamp towards the dog. A snipe flew up at hisfeet; he fired and killed it. Laska still pointed.—"Fetch it!" Anotherbird flew up close to the dog. Levin fired. But it was an unlucky dayfor him; he missed it, and when he went to look for the one he had shot,he could not find that either. He wandered all about the reeds, butLaska did not believe he had shot it, and when he sent her to find it,she pretended to hunt for it, but did not really. And in the absence ofVassenka, on whom Levin threw the blame of his failure, things went nobetter. There were plenty of snipe still, but Levin made one miss afteranother.
The slanting rays of the sun were still hot; his clothes, soaked throughwith perspiration, stuck to his body; his left boot full of waterweighed heavily on his leg and squeaked at every step; the sweat ran indrops down his powder-grimed face, his mouth was full of the bittertaste, his nose of the smell of powder and stagnant water, his ears wereringing with the incessant whir of the snipe; he could not touch thestock of his gun, it was so hot; his heart beat with short, rapidthrobs; his hands shook with excitement, and his weary legs stumbled andstaggered over the hillocks and in the swamp, but still he walked on andstill he shot. At last, after a disgraceful miss, he flung his gun andhis hat on the ground.
"No, I must control myself," he said to himself. Picking up his gun andhis hat, he called Laska, and went out of the swamp. When he got on todry ground he sat down, pulled off his boot and emptied it, then walkedto the marsh, drank some stagnant-tasting water, moistened his burninghot gun, and washed his face and hands. Feeling refreshed, he went backto the spot where a snipe had settled, firmly resolved to keep cool.
He tried to be calm, but it was the same again. His finger pressed thecock before he had taken a good aim at the bird. It got worse and worse.
He had only five birds in his game-bag when he walked out of the marshtowards the alders where he was to rejoin Stepan Arkadyevitch.
Before he caught sight of Stepan Arkadyevitch he saw his dog. Krakdarted out from behind the twisted root of an alder, black all over withthe stinking mire of the marsh, and with the air of a conqueror sniffedat Laska. Behind Krak there came into view in the shade of the aldertree the shapely figure of Stepan Arkadyevitch. He came to meet him, redand perspiring, with unbuttoned neckband, still limping in the same way.
"Well? You have been popping away!" he said, smiling good-humoredly.
"How have you got on?" queried Levin. But there was no need to ask, forhe had already seen the full game bag.
"Oh, pretty fair."
He had fourteen birds.
"A splendid marsh! I’ve no doubt Veslovsky got in your way. It’s awkwardtoo, shooting with one dog," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, to soften histriumph.


Chapter 11

When Levin and Stepan Arkadyevitch reached the peasant’s hut where Levinalways used to stay, Veslovsky was already there. He was sitting in themiddle of the hut, clinging with both hands to the bench from which hewas being pulled by a soldier, the brother of the peasant’s wife, whowas helping him off with his miry boots. Veslovsky was laughing hisinfectious, good-humored laugh.
"I’ve only just come. _Ils ont été charmants_. Just fancy, they gave medrink, fed me! Such bread, it was exquisite! _Delicieux!_ And the vodka,I never tasted any better. And they would not take a penny for anything.And they kept saying: ‘Excuse our homely ways.’"
"What should they take anything for? They were entertaining you, to besure. Do you suppose they keep vodka for sale?" said the soldier,succeeding at last in pulling the soaked boot off the blackenedstocking.
In spite of the dirtiness of the hut, which was all muddied by theirboots and the filthy dogs licking themselves clean, and the smell ofmarsh mud and powder that filled the room, and the absence of knives andforks, the party drank their tea and ate their supper with a relish onlyknown to sportsmen. Washed and clean, they went into a hay-barn sweptready for them, where the coachman had been making up beds for thegentlemen.
Though it was dusk, not one of them wanted to go to sleep.
After wavering among reminiscences and anecdotes of guns, of dogs, andof former shooting parties, the conversation rested on a topic thatinterested all of them. After Vassenka had several times over expressedhis appreciation of this delightful sleeping place among the fragranthay, this delightful broken cart (he supposed it to be broken becausethe shafts had been taken out), of the good nature of the peasants thathad treated him to vodka, of the dogs who lay at the feet of theirrespective masters, Oblonsky began telling them of a delightful shootingparty at Malthus’s, where he had stayed the previous summer.
Malthus was a well-known capitalist, who had made his money byspeculation in railway shares. Stepan Arkadyevitch described what grousemoors this Malthus had bought in the Tver province, and how they werepreserved, and of the carriages and dogcarts in which the shooting partyhad been driven, and the luncheon pavilion that had been rigged up atthe marsh.
"I don’t understand you," said Levin, sitting up in the hay; "how is itsuch people don’t disgust you? I can understand a lunch with Lafitte isall very pleasant, but don’t you dislike just that very sumptuousness?All these people, just like our spirit monopolists in old days, gettheir money in a way that gains them the contempt of everyone. Theydon’t care for their contempt, and then they use their dishonest gainsto buy off the contempt they have deserved."
"Perfectly true!" chimed in Vassenka Veslovsky. "Perfectly! Oblonsky, ofcourse, goes out of _bonhomie_, but other people say: ‘Well, Oblonskystays with them.’..."
"Not a bit of it." Levin could hear that Oblonsky was smiling as hespoke. "I simply don’t consider him more dishonest than any otherwealthy merchant or nobleman. They’ve all made their money alike—bytheir work and their intelligence."
"Oh, by what work? Do you call it work to get hold of concessions andspeculate with them?"
"Of course it’s work. Work in this sense, that if it were not for himand others like him, there would have been no railways."
"But that’s not work, like the work of a peasant or a learnedprofession."
"Granted, but it’s work in the sense that his activity produces aresult—the railways. But of course you think the railways useless."
"No, that’s another question; I am prepared to admit that they’reuseful. But all profit that is out of proportion to the labor expendedis dishonest."
"But who is to define what is proportionate?"
"Making profit by dishonest means, by trickery," said Levin, consciousthat he could not draw a distinct line between honesty and dishonesty."Such as banking, for instance," he went on. "It’s an evil—the amassingof huge fortunes without labor, just the same thing as with the spiritmonopolies, it’s only the form that’s changed. _Le roi est mort, vive leroi_. No sooner were the spirit monopolies abolished than the railwayscame up, and banking companies; that, too, is profit without work."
"Yes, that may all be very true and clever.... Lie down, Krak!" StepanArkadyevitch called to his dog, who was scratching and turning over allthe hay. He was obviously convinced of the correctness of his position,and so talked serenely and without haste. "But you have not drawn theline between honest and dishonest work. That I receive a bigger salarythan my chief clerk, though he knows more about the work than Ido—that’s dishonest, I suppose?"
"I can’t say."
"Well, but I can tell you: your receiving some five thousand, let’s say,for your work on the land, while our host, the peasant here, howeverhard he works, can never get more than fifty roubles, is just asdishonest as my earning more than my chief clerk, and Malthus gettingmore than a station-master. No, quite the contrary; I see that societytakes up a sort of antagonistic attitude to these people, which isutterly baseless, and I fancy there’s envy at the bottom of it...."
"No, that’s unfair," said Veslovsky; "how could envy come in? There issomething not nice about that sort of business."
"You say," Levin went on, "that it’s unjust for me to receive fivethousand, while the peasant has fifty; that’s true. It is unfair, and Ifeel it, but..."
"It really is. Why is it we spend our time riding, drinking, shooting,doing nothing, while they are forever at work?" said Vassenka Veslovsky,obviously for the first time in his life reflecting on the question, andconsequently considering it with perfect sincerity.
"Yes, you feel it, but you don’t give him your property," said StepanArkadyevitch, intentionally, as it seemed, provoking Levin.
There had arisen of late something like a secret antagonism between thetwo brothers-in-law; as though, since they had married sisters, a kindof rivalry had sprung up between them as to which was ordering his lifebest, and now this hostility showed itself in the conversation, as itbegan to take a personal note.
"I don’t give it away, because no one demands that from me, and if Iwanted to, I could not give it away," answered Levin, "and have no oneto give it to."
"Give it to this peasant, he would not refuse it."
"Yes, but how am I to give it up? Am I to go to him and make a deed ofconveyance?"
"I don’t know; but if you are convinced that you have no right..."
"I’m not at all convinced. On the contrary, I feel I have no right togive it up, that I have duties both to the land and to my family."
"No, excuse me, but if you consider this inequality is unjust, why is ityou don’t act accordingly?..."
"Well, I do act negatively on that idea, so far as not trying toincrease the difference of position existing between him and me."
"No, excuse me, that’s a paradox."
"Yes, there’s something of a sophistry about that," Veslovsky agreed."Ah! our host; so you’re not asleep yet?" he said to the peasant whocame into the barn, opening the creaking door. "How is it you’re notasleep?"
"No, how’s one to sleep! I thought our gentlemen would be asleep, but Iheard them chattering. I want to get a hook from here. She won’t bite?"he added, stepping cautiously with his bare feet.
"And where are you going to sleep?"
"We are going out for the night with the beasts."
"Ah, what a night!" said Veslovsky, looking out at the edge of the hutand the unharnessed wagonette that could be seen in the faint light ofthe evening glow in the great frame of the open doors. "But listen,there are women’s voices singing, and, on my word, not badly too. Who’sthat singing, my friend?"
"That’s the maids from hard by here."
"Let’s go, let’s have a walk! We shan’t go to sleep, you know. Oblonsky,come along!"
"If one could only do both, lie here and go," answered Oblonsky,stretching. "It’s capital lying here."
"Well, I shall go by myself," said Veslovsky, getting up eagerly, andputting on his shoes and stockings. "Good-bye, gentlemen. If it’s fun,I’ll fetch you. You’ve treated me to some good sport, and I won’t forgetyou."
"He really is a capital fellow, isn’t he?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch,when Veslovsky had gone out and the peasant had closed the door afterhim.
"Yes, capital," answered Levin, still thinking of the subject of theirconversation just before. It seemed to him that he had clearly expressedhis thoughts and feelings to the best of his capacity, and yet both ofthem, straightforward men and not fools, had said with one voice that hewas comforting himself with sophistries. This disconcerted him.
"It’s just this, my dear boy. One must do one of two things: eitheradmit that the existing order of society is just, and then stick up forone’s rights in it; or acknowledge that you are enjoying unjustprivileges, as I do, and then enjoy them and be satisfied."
"No, if it were unjust, you could not enjoy these advantages and besatisfied—at least I could not. The great thing for me is to feel thatI’m not to blame."
"What do you say, why not go after all?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch,evidently weary of the strain of thought. "We shan’t go to sleep, youknow. Come, let’s go!"
Levin did not answer. What they had said in the conversation, that heacted justly only in a negative sense, absorbed his thoughts. "Can it bethat it’s only possible to be just negatively?" he was asking himself.
"How strong the smell of the fresh hay is, though," said StepanArkadyevitch, getting up. "There’s not a chance of sleeping. Vassenkahas been getting up some fun there. Do you hear the laughing and hisvoice? Hadn’t we better go? Come along!"
"No, I’m not coming," answered Levin.
"Surely that’s not a matter of principle too," said Stepan Arkadyevitch,smiling, as he felt about in the dark for his cap.
"It’s not a matter of principle, but why should I go?"
"But do you know you are preparing trouble for yourself," said StepanArkadyevitch, finding his cap and getting up.
"How so?"
"Do you suppose I don’t see the line you’ve taken up with your wife? Iheard how it’s a question of the greatest consequence, whether or notyou’re to be away for a couple of days’ shooting. That’s all very wellas an idyllic episode, but for your whole life that won’t answer. A manmust be independent; he has his masculine interests. A man has to bemanly," said Oblonsky, opening the door.
"In what way? To go running after servant girls?" said Levin.
"Why not, if it amuses him? _Ça ne tire pas a consequence_. It won’t domy wife any harm, and it’ll amuse me. The great thing is to respect thesanctity of the home. There should be nothing in the home. But don’t tieyour own hands."
"Perhaps so," said Levin dryly, and he turned on his side. "Tomorrow,early, I want to go shooting, and I won’t wake anyone, and shall set offat daybreak."
"_Messieurs, venez vite!_" they heard the voice of Veslovsky comingback. "_Charmante!_ I’ve made such a discovery. _Charmante!_ a perfectGretchen, and I’ve already made friends with her. Really, exceedinglypretty," he declared in a tone of approval, as though she had been madepretty entirely on his account, and he was expressing his satisfactionwith the entertainment that had been provided for him.
Levin pretended to be asleep, while Oblonsky, putting on his slippers,and lighting a cigar, walked out of the barn, and soon their voices werelost.
For a long while Levin could not get to sleep. He heard the horsesmunching hay, then he heard the peasant and his elder boy getting readyfor the night, and going off for the night watch with the beasts, thenhe heard the soldier arranging his bed on the other side of the barn,with his nephew, the younger son of their peasant host. He heard the boyin his shrill little voice telling his uncle what he thought about thedogs, who seemed to him huge and terrible creatures, and asking what thedogs were going to hunt next day, and the soldier in a husky, sleepyvoice, telling him the sportsmen were going in the morning to the marsh,and would shoot with their guns; and then, to check the boy’s questions,he said, "Go to sleep, Vaska; go to sleep, or you’ll catch it," and soonafter he began snoring himself, and everything was still. He could onlyhear the snort of the horses, and the guttural cry of a snipe.
"Is it really only negative?" he repeated to himself. "Well, what of it?It’s not my fault." And he began thinking about the next day.
"Tomorrow I’ll go out early, and I’ll make a point of keeping cool.There are lots of snipe; and there are grouse too. When I come backthere’ll be the note from Kitty. Yes, Stiva may be right, I’m not manlywith her, I’m tied to her apron-strings.... Well, it can’t be helped!Negative again...."
Half asleep, he heard the laughter and mirthful talk of Veslovsky andStepan Arkadyevitch. For an instant he opened his eyes: the moon was up,and in the open doorway, brightly lighted up by the moonlight, they werestanding talking. Stepan Arkadyevitch was saying something of thefreshness of one girl, comparing her to a freshly peeled nut, andVeslovsky with his infectious laugh was repeating some words, probablysaid to him by a peasant: "Ah, you do your best to get round her!"Levin, half asleep, said:
"Gentlemen, tomorrow before daylight!" and fell asleep.


Chapter 12

Waking up at earliest dawn, Levin tried to wake his companions.Vassenka, lying on his stomach, with one leg in a stocking thrust out,was sleeping so soundly that he could elicit no response. Oblonsky, halfasleep, declined to get up so early. Even Laska, who was asleep, curledup in the hay, got up unwillingly, and lazily stretched out andstraightened her hind legs one after the other. Getting on his boots andstockings, taking his gun, and carefully opening the creaking door ofthe barn, Levin went out into the road. The coachmen were sleeping intheir carriages, the horses were dozing. Only one was lazily eatingoats, dipping its nose into the manger. It was still gray out-of-doors.
"Why are you up so early, my dear?" the old woman, their hostess, said,coming out of the hut and addressing him affectionately as an oldfriend.
"Going shooting, granny. Do I go this way to the marsh?"
"Straight out at the back; by our threshing floor, my dear, and hemppatches; there’s a little footpath." Stepping carefully with hersunburnt, bare feet, the old woman conducted Levin, and moved back thefence for him by the threshing floor.
"Straight on and you’ll come to the marsh. Our lads drove the cattlethere yesterday evening."
Laska ran eagerly forward along the little path. Levin followed her witha light, rapid step, continually looking at the sky. He hoped the sunwould not be up before he reached the marsh. But the sun did not delay.The moon, which had been bright when he went out, by now shone only likea crescent of quicksilver. The pink flush of dawn, which one could nothelp seeing before, now had to be sought to be discerned at all. Whatwere before undefined, vague blurs in the distant countryside could nowbe distinctly seen. They were sheaves of rye. The dew, not visible tillthe sun was up, wetted Levin’s legs and his blouse above his belt in thehigh growing, fragrant hemp patch, from which the pollen had alreadyfallen out. In the transparent stillness of morning the smallest soundswere audible. A bee flew by Levin’s ear with the whizzing sound of abullet. He looked carefully, and saw a second and a third. They were allflying from the beehives behind the hedge, and they disappeared over thehemp patch in the direction of the marsh. The path led straight to themarsh. The marsh could be recognized by the mist which rose from it,thicker in one place and thinner in another, so that the reeds andwillow bushes swayed like islands in this mist. At the edge of the marshand the road, peasant boys and men, who had been herding for the night,were lying, and in the dawn all were asleep under their coats. Not farfrom them were three hobbled horses. One of them clanked a chain. Laskawalked beside her master, pressing a little forward and looking round.Passing the sleeping peasants and reaching the first reeds, Levinexamined his pistols and let his dog off. One of the horses, a sleek,dark-brown three-year-old, seeing the dog, started away, switched itstail and snorted. The other horses too were frightened, and splashingthrough the water with their hobbled legs, and drawing their hoofs outof the thick mud with a squelching sound, they bounded out of the marsh.Laska stopped, looking ironically at the horses and inquiringly atLevin. Levin patted Laska, and whistled as a sign that she might begin.
Laska ran joyfully and anxiously through the slush that swayed underher.
Running into the marsh among the familiar scents of roots, marsh plants,and slime, and the extraneous smell of horse dung, Laska detected atonce a smell that pervaded the whole marsh, the scent of thatstrong-smelling bird that always excited her more than any other. Hereand there among the moss and marsh plants this scent was very strong,but it was impossible to determine in which direction it grew strongeror fainter. To find the direction, she had to go farther away from thewind. Not feeling the motion of her legs, Laska bounded with a stiffgallop, so that at each bound she could stop short, to the right, awayfrom the wind that blew from the east before sunrise, and turned facingthe wind. Sniffing in the air with dilated nostrils, she felt at oncethat not their tracks only but they themselves were here before her, andnot one, but many. Laska slackened her speed. They were here, but whereprecisely she could not yet determine. To find the very spot, she beganto make a circle, when suddenly her master’s voice drew her off. "Laska!here?" he asked, pointing her to a different direction. She stopped,asking him if she had better not go on doing as she had begun. But herepeated his command in an angry voice, pointing to a spot covered withwater, where there could not be anything. She obeyed him, pretending shewas looking, so as to please him, went round it, and went back to herformer position, and was at once aware of the scent again. Now when hewas not hindering her, she knew what to do, and without looking at whatwas under her feet, and to her vexation stumbling over a high stump intothe water, but righting herself with her strong, supple legs, she beganmaking the circle which was to make all clear to her. The scent of themreached her, stronger and stronger, and more and more defined, and allat once it became perfectly clear to her that one of them was here,behind this tuft of reeds, five paces in front of her; she stopped, andher whole body was still and rigid. On her short legs she could seenothing in front of her, but by the scent she knew it was sitting notmore than five paces off. She stood still, feeling more and moreconscious of it, and enjoying it in anticipation. Her tail was stretchedstraight and tense, and only wagging at the extreme end. Her mouth wasslightly open, her ears raised. One ear had been turned wrong side outas she ran up, and she breathed heavily but warily, and still morewarily looked round, but more with her eyes than her head, to hermaster. He was coming along with the face she knew so well, though theeyes were always terrible to her. He stumbled over the stump as he came,and moved, as she thought, extraordinarily slowly. She thought he cameslowly, but he was running.
Noticing Laska’s special attitude as she crouched on the ground, as itwere, scratching big prints with her hind paws, and with her mouthslightly open, Levin knew she was pointing at grouse, and with an inwardprayer for luck, especially with the first bird, he ran up to her.Coming quite close up to her, he could from his height look beyond her,and he saw with his eyes what she was seeing with her nose. In a spacebetween two little thickets, at a couple of yards’ distance, he couldsee a grouse. Turning its head, it was listening. Then lightly preeningand folding its wings, it disappeared round a corner with a clumsy wagof its tail.
"Fetch it, fetch it!" shouted Levin, giving Laska a shove from behind.
"But I can’t go," thought Laska. "Where am I to go? From here I feelthem, but if I move forward I shall know nothing of where they are orwho they are." But then he shoved her with his knee, and in an excitedwhisper said, "Fetch it, Laska."
"Well, if that’s what he wishes, I’ll do it, but I can’t answer formyself now," she thought, and darted forward as fast as her legs wouldcarry her between the thick bushes. She scented nothing now; she couldonly see and hear, without understanding anything.
Ten paces from her former place a grouse rose with a guttural cry andthe peculiar round sound of its wings. And immediately after the shot itsplashed heavily with its white breast on the wet mire. Another bird didnot linger, but rose behind Levin without the dog. When Levin turnedtowards it, it was already some way off. But his shot caught it. Flyingtwenty paces further, the second grouse rose upwards, and whirling roundlike a ball, dropped heavily on a dry place.
"Come, this is going to be some good!" thought Levin, packing the warmand fat grouse into his game bag. "Eh, Laska, will it be good?"
When Levin, after loading his gun, moved on, the sun had fully risen,though unseen behind the storm-clouds. The moon had lost all of itsluster, and was like a white cloud in the sky. Not a single star couldbe seen. The sedge, silvery with dew before, now shone like gold. Thestagnant pools were all like amber. The blue of the grass had changed toyellow-green. The marsh birds twittered and swarmed about the brook andupon the bushes that glittered with dew and cast long shadows. A hawkwoke up and settled on a haycock, turning its head from side to side andlooking discontentedly at the marsh. Crows were flying about the field,and a bare-legged boy was driving the horses to an old man, who had gotup from under his long coat and was combing his hair. The smoke from thegun was white as milk over the green of the grass.
One of the boys ran up to Levin.
"Uncle, there were ducks here yesterday!" he shouted to him, and hewalked a little way off behind him.
And Levin was doubly pleased, in sight of the boy, who expressed hisapproval, at killing three snipe, one after another, straight off.


Chapter 13

The sportsman’s saying, that if the first beast or the first bird is notmissed, the day will be lucky, turned out correct.
At ten o’clock Levin, weary, hungry, and happy after a tramp of twentymiles, returned to his night’s lodging with nineteen head of fine gameand one duck, which he tied to his belt, as it would not go into thegame bag. His companions had long been awake, and had had time to gethungry and have breakfast.
"Wait a bit, wait a bit, I know there are nineteen," said Levin,counting a second time over the grouse and snipe, that looked so muchless important now, bent and dry and bloodstained, with heads crookedaside, than they did when they were flying.
The number was verified, and Stepan Arkadyevitch’s envy pleased Levin.He was pleased too on returning to find the man sent by Kitty with anote was already there.
"I am perfectly well and happy. If you were uneasy about me, you canfeel easier than ever. I’ve a new bodyguard, Marya Vlasyevna,"—this wasthe midwife, a new and important personage in Levin’s domestic life."She has come to have a look at me. She found me perfectly well, and wehave kept her till you are back. All are happy and well, and please,don’t be in a hurry to come back, but, if the sport is good, stayanother day."
These two pleasures, his lucky shooting and the letter from his wife,were so great that two slightly disagreeable incidents passed lightlyover Levin. One was that the chestnut trace horse, who had beenunmistakably overworked on the previous day, was off his feed and out ofsorts. The coachman said he was "Overdriven yesterday, KonstantinDmitrievitch. Yes, indeed! driven ten miles with no sense!"
The other unpleasant incident, which for the first minute destroyed hisgood humor, though later he laughed at it a great deal, was to find thatof all the provisions Kitty had provided in such abundance that onewould have thought there was enough for a week, nothing was left. On hisway back, tired and hungry from shooting, Levin had so distinct a visionof meat-pies that as he approached the hut he seemed to smell and tastethem, as Laska had smelt the game, and he immediately told Philip togive him some. It appeared that there were no pies left, nor even anychicken.
"Well, this fellow’s appetite!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, laughing andpointing at Vassenka Veslovsky. "I never suffer from loss of appetite,but he’s really marvelous!..."
"Well, it can’t be helped," said Levin, looking gloomily at Veslovsky."Well, Philip, give me some beef, then."
"The beef’s been eaten, and the bones given to the dogs," answeredPhilip.
Levin was so hurt that he said, in a tone of vexation, "You might haveleft me something!" and he felt ready to cry.
"Then put away the game," he said in a shaking voice to Philip, tryingnot to look at Vassenka, "and cover them with some nettles. And youmight at least ask for some milk for me."
But when he had drunk some milk, he felt ashamed immediately at havingshown his annoyance to a stranger, and he began to laugh at his hungrymortification.
In the evening they went shooting again, and Veslovsky had severalsuccessful shots, and in the night they drove home.
Their homeward journey was as lively as their drive out had been.Veslovsky sang songs and related with enjoyment his adventures with thepeasants, who had regaled him with vodka, and said to him, "Excuse ourhomely ways," and his night’s adventures with kiss-in-the-ring and theservant-girl and the peasant, who had asked him was he married, and onlearning that he was not, said to him, "Well, mind you don’t run afterother men’s wives—you’d better get one of your own." These words hadparticularly amused Veslovsky.
"Altogether, I’ve enjoyed our outing awfully. And you, Levin?"
"I have, very much," Levin said quite sincerely. It was particularlydelightful to him to have got rid of the hostility he had been feelingtowards Vassenka Veslovsky at home, and to feel instead the mostfriendly disposition to him.


Chapter 14

Next day at ten o’clock Levin, who had already gone his rounds, knockedat the room where Vassenka had been put for the night.
"_Entrez!_" Veslovsky called to him. "Excuse me, I’ve only just finishedmy ablutions," he said, smiling, standing before him in his underclothesonly.
"Don’t mind me, please." Levin sat down in the window. "Have you sleptwell?"
"Like the dead. What sort of day is it for shooting?"
"What will you take, tea or coffee?"
"Neither. I’ll wait till lunch. I’m really ashamed. I suppose the ladiesare down? A walk now would be capital. You show me your horses."
After walking about the garden, visiting the stable, and even doing somegymnastic exercises together on the parallel bars, Levin returned to thehouse with his guest, and went with him into the drawing room.
"We had splendid shooting, and so many delightful experiences!" saidVeslovsky, going up to Kitty, who was sitting at the samovar. "What apity ladies are cut off from these delights!"
"Well, I suppose he must say something to the lady of the house," Levinsaid to himself. Again he fancied something in the smile, in theall-conquering air with which their guest addressed Kitty....
The princess, sitting on the other side of the table with MaryaVlasyevna and Stepan Arkadyevitch, called Levin to her side, and beganto talk to him about moving to Moscow for Kitty’s confinement, andgetting ready rooms for them. Just as Levin had disliked all the trivialpreparations for his wedding, as derogatory to the grandeur of theevent, now he felt still more offensive the preparations for theapproaching birth, the date of which they reckoned, it seemed, on theirfingers. He tried to turn a deaf ear to these discussions of the bestpatterns of long clothes for the coming baby; tried to turn away andavoid seeing the mysterious, endless strips of knitting, the trianglesof linen, and so on, to which Dolly attached special importance. Thebirth of a son (he was certain it would be a son) which was promisedhim, but which he still could not believe in—so marvelous itseemed—presented itself to his mind, on one hand, as a happiness soimmense, and therefore so incredible; on the other, as an event somysterious, that this assumption of a definite knowledge of what wouldbe, and consequent preparation for it, as for something ordinary thatdid happen to people, jarred on him as confusing and humiliating.
But the princess did not understand his feelings, and put down hisreluctance to think and talk about it to carelessness and indifference,and so she gave him no peace. She had commissioned Stepan Arkadyevitchto look at a flat, and now she called Levin up.
"I know nothing about it, princess. Do as you think fit," he said.
"You must decide when you will move."
"I really don’t know. I know millions of children are born away fromMoscow, and doctors ... why..."
"But if so..."
"Oh, no, as Kitty wishes."
"We can’t talk to Kitty about it! Do you want me to frighten her? Why,this spring Natalia Golitzina died from having an ignorant doctor."
"I will do just what you say," he said gloomily.
The princess began talking to him, but he did not hear her. Though theconversation with the princess had indeed jarred upon him, he wasgloomy, not on account of that conversation, but from what he saw at thesamovar.
"No, it’s impossible," he thought, glancing now and then at Vassenkabending over Kitty, telling her something with his charming smile, andat her, flushed and disturbed.
There was something not nice in Vassenka’s attitude, in his eyes, in hissmile. Levin even saw something not nice in Kitty’s attitude and look.And again the light died away in his eyes. Again, as before, all of asudden, without the slightest transition, he felt cast down from apinnacle of happiness, peace, and dignity, into an abyss of despair,rage, and humiliation. Again everything and everyone had become hatefulto him.
"You do just as you think best, princess," he said again, looking round.
"Heavy is the cap of Monomach," Stepan Arkadyevitch said playfully,hinting, evidently, not simply at the princess’s conversation, but atthe cause of Levin’s agitation, which he had noticed.
"How late you are today, Dolly!"
Everyone got up to greet Darya Alexandrovna. Vassenka only rose for aninstant, and with the lack of courtesy to ladies characteristic of themodern young man, he scarcely bowed, and resumed his conversation again,laughing at something.
"I’ve been worried about Masha. She did not sleep well, and isdreadfully tiresome today," said Dolly.
The conversation Vassenka had started with Kitty was running on the samelines as on the previous evening, discussing Anna, and whether love isto be put higher than worldly considerations. Kitty disliked theconversation, and she was disturbed both by the subject and the tone inwhich it was conducted, and also by the knowledge of the effect it wouldhave on her husband. But she was too simple and innocent to know how tocut short this conversation, or even to conceal the superficial pleasureafforded her by the young man’s very obvious admiration. She wanted tostop it, but she did not know what to do. Whatever she did she knewwould be observed by her husband, and the worst interpretation put onit. And, in fact, when she asked Dolly what was wrong with Masha, andVassenka, waiting till this uninteresting conversation was over, beganto gaze indifferently at Dolly, the question struck Levin as anunnatural and disgusting piece of hypocrisy.
"What do you say, shall we go and look for mushrooms today?" said Dolly.
"By all means, please, and I shall come too," said Kitty, and sheblushed. She wanted from politeness to ask Vassenka whether he wouldcome, and she did not ask him. "Where are you going, Kostya?" she askedher husband with a guilty face, as he passed by her with a resolutestep. This guilty air confirmed all his suspicions.
"The mechanician came when I was away; I haven’t seen him yet," he said,not looking at her.
He went downstairs, but before he had time to leave his study he heardhis wife’s familiar footsteps running with reckless speed to him.
"What do you want?" he said to her shortly. "We are busy."
"I beg your pardon," she said to the German mechanician; "I want a fewwords with my husband."
The German would have left the room, but Levin said to him:
"Don’t disturb yourself."
"The train is at three?" queried the German. "I mustn’t be late."
Levin did not answer him, but walked out himself with his wife.
"Well, what have you to say to me?" he said to her in French.
He did not look her in the face, and did not care to see that she in hercondition was trembling all over, and had a piteous, crushed look.
"I ... I want to say that we can’t go on like this; that this ismisery..." she said.
"The servants are here at the sideboard," he said angrily; "don’t make ascene."
"Well, let’s go in here!"
They were standing in the passage. Kitty would have gone into the nextroom, but there the English governess was giving Tanya a lesson.
"Well, come into the garden."
In the garden they came upon a peasant weeding the path. And no longerconsidering that the peasant could see her tear-stained and his agitatedface, that they looked like people fleeing from some disaster, they wenton with rapid steps, feeling that they must speak out and clear upmisunderstandings, must be alone together, and so get rid of the miserythey were both feeling.
"We can’t go on like this! It’s misery! I am wretched; you are wretched.What for?" she said, when they had at last reached a solitary gardenseat at a turn in the lime tree avenue.
"But tell me one thing: was there in his tone anything unseemly, notnice, humiliatingly horrible?" he said, standing before her again in thesame position with his clenched fists on his chest, as he had stoodbefore her that night.
"Yes," she said in a shaking voice; "but, Kostya, surely you see I’m notto blame? All the morning I’ve been trying to take a tone ... but suchpeople.... Why did he come? How happy we were!" she said, breathlesswith the sobs that shook her.
Although nothing had been pursuing them, and there was nothing to runaway from, and they could not possibly have found anything verydelightful on that garden seat, the gardener saw with astonishment thatthey passed him on their way home with comforted and radiant faces.


Chapter 15

After escorting his wife upstairs, Levin went to Dolly’s part of thehouse. Darya Alexandrovna, for her part, was in great distress too thatday. She was walking about the room, talking angrily to a little girl,who stood in the corner roaring.
"And you shall stand all day in the corner, and have your dinner allalone, and not see one of your dolls, and I won’t make you a new frock,"she said, not knowing how to punish her.
"Oh, she is a disgusting child!" she turned to Levin. "Where does sheget such wicked propensities?"
"Why, what has she done?" Levin said without much interest, for he hadwanted to ask her advice, and so was annoyed that he had come at anunlucky moment.
"Grisha and she went into the raspberries, and there ... I can’t tellyou really what she did. It’s a thousand pities Miss Elliot’s not withus. This one sees to nothing—she’s a machine.... _Figurez-vous que lapetite_?..."
And Darya Alexandrovna described Masha’s crime.
"That proves nothing; it’s not a question of evil propensities at all,it’s simply mischief," Levin assured her.
"But you are upset about something? What have you come for?" askedDolly. "What’s going on there?"
And in the tone of her question Levin heard that it would be easy forhim to say what he had meant to say.
"I’ve not been in there, I’ve been alone in the garden with Kitty. We’vehad a quarrel for the second time since ... Stiva came."
Dolly looked at him with her shrewd, comprehending eyes.
"Come, tell me, honor bright, has there been ... not in Kitty, but inthat gentleman’s behavior, a tone which might be unpleasant—notunpleasant, but horrible, offensive to a husband?"
"You mean, how shall I say.... Stay, stay in the corner!" she said toMasha, who, detecting a faint smile in her mother’s face, had beenturning round. "The opinion of the world would be that he is behaving asyoung men do behave. _Il fait la cour à une jeune et jolie femme_, and ahusband who’s a man of the world should only be flattered by it."
"Yes, yes," said Levin gloomily; "but you noticed it?"
"Not only I, but Stiva noticed it. Just after breakfast he said to me inso many words, _Je crois que Veslovsky fait un petit brin de cour àKitty_."
"Well, that’s all right then; now I’m satisfied. I’ll send him away,"said Levin.
"What do you mean! Are you crazy?" Dolly cried in horror; "nonsense,Kostya, only think!" she said, laughing. "You can go now to Fanny," shesaid to Masha. "No, if you wish it, I’ll speak to Stiva. He’ll take himaway. He can say you’re expecting visitors. Altogether he doesn’t fitinto the house."
"No, no, I’ll do it myself."
"But you’ll quarrel with him?"
"Not a bit. I shall so enjoy it," Levin said, his eyes flashing withreal enjoyment. "Come, forgive her, Dolly, she won’t do it again," hesaid of the little sinner, who had not gone to Fanny, but was standingirresolutely before her mother, waiting and looking up from under herbrows to catch her mother’s eye.
The mother glanced at her. The child broke into sobs, hid her face onher mother’s lap, and Dolly laid her thin, tender hand on her head.
"And what is there in common between us and him?" thought Levin, and hewent off to look for Veslovsky.
As he passed through the passage he gave orders for the carriage to begot ready to drive to the station.
"The spring was broken yesterday," said the footman.
"Well, the covered trap, then, and make haste. Where’s the visitor?"
"The gentleman’s gone to his room."
Levin came upon Veslovsky at the moment when the latter, having unpackedhis things from his trunk, and laid out some new songs, was putting onhis gaiters to go out riding.
Whether there was something exceptional in Levin’s face, or thatVassenka was himself conscious that _ce petit brin de cour_ he wasmaking was out of place in this family, but he was somewhat (as much asa young man in society can be) disconcerted at Levin’s entrance.
"You ride in gaiters?"
"Yes, it’s much cleaner," said Vassenka, putting his fat leg on a chair,fastening the bottom hook, and smiling with simple-hearted good humor.
He was undoubtedly a good-natured fellow, and Levin felt sorry for himand ashamed of himself, as his host, when he saw the shy look onVassenka’s face.
On the table lay a piece of stick which they had broken together thatmorning, trying their strength. Levin took the fragment in his hands andbegan smashing it up, breaking bits off the stick, not knowing how tobegin.
"I wanted...." He paused, but suddenly, remembering Kitty and everythingthat had happened, he said, looking him resolutely in the face: "I haveordered the horses to be put-to for you."
"How so?" Vassenka began in surprise. "To drive where?"
"For you to drive to the station," Levin said gloomily.
"Are you going away, or has something happened?"
"It happens that I expect visitors," said Levin, his strong fingers moreand more rapidly breaking off the ends of the split stick. "And I’m notexpecting visitors, and nothing has happened, but I beg you to go away.You can explain my rudeness as you like."
Vassenka drew himself up.
"I beg you to explain..." he said with dignity, understanding at last.
"I can’t explain," Levin said softly and deliberately, trying to controlthe trembling of his jaw; "and you’d better not ask."
And as the split ends were all broken off, Levin clutched the thick endsin his finger, broke the stick in two, and carefully caught the end asit fell.
Probably the sight of those nervous fingers, of the muscles he hadproved that morning at gymnastics, of the glittering eyes, the softvoice, and quivering jaws, convinced Vassenka better than any words. Hebowed, shrugging his shoulders, and smiling contemptuously.
"Can I not see Oblonsky?"
The shrug and the smile did not irritate Levin.
"What else was there for him to do?" he thought.
"I’ll send him to you at once."
"What madness is this?" Stepan Arkadyevitch said when, after hearingfrom his friend that he was being turned out of the house, he foundLevin in the garden, where he was walking about waiting for his guest’sdeparture. "_Mais c’est ridicule!_ What fly has stung you? _Mais c’estdu dernier ridicule!_ What did you think, if a young man..."
But the place where Levin had been stung was evidently still sore, forhe turned pale again, when Stepan Arkadyevitch would have enlarged onthe reason, and he himself cut him short.
"Please don’t go into it! I can’t help it. I feel ashamed of how I’mtreating you and him. But it won’t be, I imagine, a great grief to himto go, and his presence was distasteful to me and to my wife."
"But it’s insulting to him! _Et puis c’est ridicule_."
"And to me it’s both insulting and distressing! And I’m not at fault inany way, and there’s no need for me to suffer."
"Well, this I didn’t expect of you! _On peut être jaloux, mais à cepoint, c’est du dernier ridicule!_"
Levin turned quickly, and walked away from him into the depths of theavenue, and he went on walking up and down alone. Soon he heard therumble of the trap, and saw from behind the trees how Vassenka, sittingin the hay (unluckily there was no seat in the trap) in his Scotch cap,was driven along the avenue, jolting up and down over the ruts.
"What’s this?" Levin thought, when a footman ran out of the house andstopped the trap. It was the mechanician, whom Levin had totallyforgotten. The mechanician, bowing low, said something to Veslovsky,then clambered into the trap, and they drove off together.
Stepan Arkadyevitch and the princess were much upset by Levin’s action.And he himself felt not only in the highest degree _ridicule_, but alsoutterly guilty and disgraced. But remembering what sufferings he and hiswife had been through, when he asked himself how he should act anothertime, he answered that he should do just the same again.
In spite of all this, towards the end of that day, everyone except theprincess, who could not pardon Levin’s action, became extraordinarilylively and good humored, like children after a punishment or grown-uppeople after a dreary, ceremonious reception, so that by the eveningVassenka’s dismissal was spoken of, in the absence of the princess, asthough it were some remote event. And Dolly, who had inherited herfather’s gift of humorous storytelling, made Varenka helpless withlaughter as she related for the third and fourth time, always with freshhumorous additions, how she had only just put on her new shoes for thebenefit of the visitor, and on going into the drawing room, heardsuddenly the rumble of the trap. And who should be in the trap butVassenka himself, with his Scotch cap, and his songs and his gaiters,and all, sitting in the hay.
"If only you’d ordered out the carriage! But no! and then I hear:‘Stop!’ Oh, I thought they’ve relented. I look out, and behold a fatGerman being sat down by him and driving away.... And my new shoes allfor nothing!..."


Chapter 16

Darya Alexandrovna carried out her intention and went to see Anna. Shewas sorry to annoy her sister and to do anything Levin disliked. Shequite understood how right the Levins were in not wishing to haveanything to do with Vronsky. But she felt she must go and see Anna, andshow her that her feelings could not be changed, in spite of the changein her position. That she might be independent of the Levins in thisexpedition, Darya Alexandrovna sent to the village to hire horses forthe drive; but Levin learning of it went to her to protest.
"What makes you suppose that I dislike your going? But, even if I diddislike it, I should still more dislike your not taking my horses," hesaid. "You never told me that you were going for certain. Hiring horsesin the village is disagreeable to me, and, what’s of more importance,they’ll undertake the job and never get you there. I have horses. And ifyou don’t want to wound me, you’ll take mine."
Darya Alexandrovna had to consent, and on the day fixed Levin had readyfor his sister-in-law a set of four horses and relays, getting themtogether from the farm- and saddle-horses—not at all a smart-lookingset, but capable of taking Darya Alexandrovna the whole distance in asingle day. At that moment, when horses were wanted for the princess,who was going, and for the midwife, it was a difficult matter for Levinto make up the number, but the duties of hospitality would not let himallow Darya Alexandrovna to hire horses when staying in his house.Moreover, he was well aware that the twenty roubles that would be askedfor the journey were a serious matter for her; Darya Alexandrovna’specuniary affairs, which were in a very unsatisfactory state, were takento heart by the Levins as if they were their own.
Darya Alexandrovna, by Levin’s advice, started before daybreak. The roadwas good, the carriage comfortable, the horses trotted along merrily,and on the box, besides the coachman, sat the counting-house clerk, whomLevin was sending instead of a groom for greater security. DaryaAlexandrovna dozed and waked up only on reaching the inn where thehorses were to be changed.
After drinking tea at the same well-to-do peasant’s with whom Levin hadstayed on the way to Sviazhsky’s, and chatting with the women abouttheir children, and with the old man about Count Vronsky, whom thelatter praised very highly, Darya Alexandrovna, at ten o’clock, went onagain. At home, looking after her children, she had no time to think. Sonow, after this journey of four hours, all the thoughts she hadsuppressed before rushed swarming into her brain, and she thought overall her life as she never had before, and from the most different pointsof view. Her thoughts seemed strange even to herself. At first shethought about the children, about whom she was uneasy, although theprincess and Kitty (she reckoned more upon her) had promised to lookafter them. "If only Masha does not begin her naughty tricks, if Grishaisn’t kicked by a horse, and Lily’s stomach isn’t upset again!" shethought. But these questions of the present were succeeded by questionsof the immediate future. She began thinking how she had to get a newflat in Moscow for the coming winter, to renew the drawing roomfurniture, and to make her elder girl a cloak. Then questions of themore remote future occurred to her: how she was to place her children inthe world. "The girls are all right," she thought; "but the boys?"
"It’s very well that I’m teaching Grisha, but of course that’s onlybecause I am free myself now, I’m not with child. Stiva, of course,there’s no counting on. And with the help of good-natured friends I canbring them up; but if there’s another baby coming?..." And the thoughtstruck her how untruly it was said that the curse laid on woman was thatin sorrow she should bring forth children.
"The birth itself, that’s nothing; but the months of carrying thechild—that’s what’s so intolerable," she thought, picturing to herselfher last pregnancy, and the death of the last baby. And she recalled theconversation she had just had with the young woman at the inn. On beingasked whether she had any children, the handsome young woman hadanswered cheerfully:
"I had a girl baby, but God set me free; I buried her last Lent."
"Well, did you grieve very much for her?" asked Darya Alexandrovna.
"Why grieve? The old man has grandchildren enough as it is. It was onlya trouble. No working, nor nothing. Only a tie."
This answer had struck Darya Alexandrovna as revolting in spite of thegood-natured and pleasing face of the young woman; but now she could nothelp recalling these words. In those cynical words there was indeed agrain of truth.
"Yes, altogether," thought Darya Alexandrovna, looking back over herwhole existence during those fifteen years of her married life,"pregnancy, sickness, mental incapacity, indifference to everything, andmost of all—hideousness. Kitty, young and pretty as she is, even Kittyhas lost her looks; and I when I’m with child become hideous, I know it.The birth, the agony, the hideous agonies, that last moment ... then thenursing, the sleepless nights, the fearful pains...."
Darya Alexandrovna shuddered at the mere recollection of the pain fromsore breasts which she had suffered with almost every child. "Then thechildren’s illnesses, that everlasting apprehension; then bringing themup; evil propensities" (she thought of little Masha’s crime among theraspberries), "education, Latin—it’s all so incomprehensible anddifficult. And on the top of it all, the death of these children." Andthere rose again before her imagination the cruel memory, that alwaystore her mother’s heart, of the death of her last little baby, who haddied of croup; his funeral, the callous indifference of all at thelittle pink coffin, and her own torn heart, and her lonely anguish atthe sight of the pale little brow with its projecting temples, and theopen, wondering little mouth seen in the coffin at the moment when itwas being covered with the little pink lid with a cross braided on it.
"And all this, what’s it for? What is to come of it all? That I’mwasting my life, never having a moment’s peace, either with child, ornursing a child, forever irritable, peevish, wretched myself andworrying others, repulsive to my husband, while the children are growingup unhappy, badly educated, and penniless. Even now, if it weren’t forspending the summer at the Levins’, I don’t know how we should bemanaging to live. Of course Kostya and Kitty have so much tact that wedon’t feel it; but it can’t go on. They’ll have children, they won’t beable to keep us; it’s a drag on them as it is. How is papa, who hashardly anything left for himself, to help us? So that I can’t even bringthe children up by myself, and may find it hard with the help of otherpeople, at the cost of humiliation. Why, even if we suppose the greatestgood luck, that the children don’t die, and I bring them up somehow. Atthe very best they’ll simply be decent people. That’s all I can hopefor. And to gain simply that—what agonies, what toil!... One’s wholelife ruined!" Again she recalled what the young peasant woman had said,and again she was revolted at the thought; but she could not helpadmitting that there was a grain of brutal truth in the words.
"Is it far now, Mihail?" Darya Alexandrovna asked the counting houseclerk, to turn her mind from thoughts that were frightening her.
"From this village, they say, it’s five miles." The carriage drove alongthe village street and onto a bridge. On the bridge was a crowd ofpeasant women with coils of ties for the sheaves on their shoulders,gaily and noisily chattering. They stood still on the bridge, staringinquisitively at the carriage. All the faces turned to DaryaAlexandrovna looked to her healthy and happy, making her envious oftheir enjoyment of life. "They’re all living, they’re all enjoyinglife," Darya Alexandrovna still mused when she had passed the peasantwomen and was driving uphill again at a trot, seated comfortably on thesoft springs of the old carriage, "while I, let out, as it were fromprison, from the world of worries that fret me to death, am only lookingabout me now for an instant. They all live; those peasant women and mysister Natalia and Varenka and Anna, whom I am going to see—all, but notI.
"And they attack Anna. What for? am I any better? I have, anyway, ahusband I love—not as I should like to love him, still I do love him,while Anna never loved hers. How is she to blame? She wants to live. Godhas put that in our hearts. Very likely I should have done the same.Even to this day I don’t feel sure I did right in listening to her atthat terrible time when she came to me in Moscow. I ought then to havecast off my husband and have begun my life fresh. I might have loved andhave been loved in reality. And is it any better as it is? I don’trespect him. He’s necessary to me," she thought about her husband, "andI put up with him. Is that any better? At that time I could still havebeen admired, I had beauty left me still," Darya Alexandrovna pursuedher thoughts, and she would have liked to look at herself in the lookingglass. She had a traveling looking glass in her handbag, and she wantedto take it out; but looking at the backs of the coachman and the swayingcounting house clerk, she felt that she would be ashamed if either ofthem were to look round, and she did not take out the glass.
But without looking in the glass, she thought that even now it was nottoo late; and she thought of Sergey Ivanovitch, who was alwaysparticularly attentive to her, of Stiva’s good-hearted friend,Turovtsin, who had helped her nurse her children through the scarlatina,and was in love with her. And there was someone else, a quite young man,who—her husband had told her it as a joke—thought her more beautifulthan either of her sisters. And the most passionate and impossibleromances rose before Darya Alexandrovna’s imagination. "Anna did quiteright, and certainly I shall never reproach her for it. She is happy,she makes another person happy, and she’s not broken down as I am, butmost likely just as she always was, bright, clever, open to everyimpression," thought Darya Alexandrovna,—and a sly smile curved herlips, for, as she pondered on Anna’s love affair, Darya Alexandrovnaconstructed on parallel lines an almost identical love affair forherself, with an imaginary composite figure, the ideal man who was inlove with her. She, like Anna, confessed the whole affair to herhusband. And the amazement and perplexity of Stepan Arkadyevitch at thisavowal made her smile.
In such daydreams she reached the turning of the highroad that led toVozdvizhenskoe.


Chapter 17

The coachman pulled up his four horses and looked round to the right, toa field of rye, where some peasants were sitting on a cart. The countinghouse clerk was just going to jump down, but on second thoughts heshouted peremptorily to the peasants instead, and beckoned to them tocome up. The wind, that seemed to blow as they drove, dropped when thecarriage stood still; gadflies settled on the steaming horses thatangrily shook them off. The metallic clank of a whetstone against ascythe, that came to them from the cart, ceased. One of the peasants gotup and came towards the carriage.
"Well, you are slow!" the counting house clerk shouted angrily to thepeasant who was stepping slowly with his bare feet over the ruts of therough dry road. "Come along, do!"
A curly-headed old man with a bit of bast tied round his hair, and hisbent back dark with perspiration, came towards the carriage, quickeninghis steps, and took hold of the mud-guard with his sunburnt hand.
"Vozdvizhenskoe, the manor house? the count’s?" he repeated; "go on tothe end of this track. Then turn to the left. Straight along the avenueand you’ll come right upon it. But whom do you want? The count himself?"
"Well, are they at home, my good man?" Darya Alexandrovna said vaguely,not knowing how to ask about Anna, even of this peasant.
"At home for sure," said the peasant, shifting from one bare foot to theother, and leaving a distinct print of five toes and a heel in the dust."Sure to be at home," he repeated, evidently eager to talk. "Onlyyesterday visitors arrived. There’s a sight of visitors come. What doyou want?" He turned round and called to a lad, who was shoutingsomething to him from the cart. "Oh! They all rode by here not longsince, to look at a reaping machine. They’ll be home by now. And whowill you be belonging to?..."
"We’ve come a long way," said the coachman, climbing onto the box. "Soit’s not far?"
"I tell you, it’s just here. As soon as you get out..." he said, keepinghold all the while of the carriage.
A healthy-looking, broad-shouldered young fellow came up too.
"What, is it laborers they want for the harvest?" he asked.
"I don’t know, my boy."
"So you keep to the left, and you’ll come right on it," said thepeasant, unmistakably loth to let the travelers go, and eager toconverse.
The coachman started the horses, but they were only just turning offwhen the peasant shouted: "Stop! Hi, friend! Stop!" called the twovoices. The coachman stopped.
"They’re coming! They’re yonder!" shouted the peasant. "See what aturn-out!" he said, pointing to four persons on horseback, and two in a_char-à-banc_, coming along the road.
They were Vronsky with a jockey, Veslovsky and Anna on horseback, andPrincess Varvara and Sviazhsky in the _char-à-banc_. They had gone outto look at the working of a new reaping machine.
When the carriage stopped, the party on horseback were coming at awalking pace. Anna was in front beside Veslovsky. Anna, quietly walkingher horse, a sturdy English cob with cropped mane and short tail, herbeautiful head with her black hair straying loose under her high hat,her full shoulders, her slender waist in her black riding habit, and allthe ease and grace of her deportment, impressed Dolly.
For the first minute it seemed to her unsuitable for Anna to be onhorseback. The conception of riding on horseback for a lady was, inDarya Alexandrovna’s mind, associated with ideas of youthful flirtationand frivolity, which, in her opinion, was unbecoming in Anna’s position.But when she had scrutinized her, seeing her closer, she was at oncereconciled to her riding. In spite of her elegance, everything was sosimple, quiet, and dignified in the attitude, the dress and themovements of Anna, that nothing could have been more natural.
Beside Anna, on a hot-looking gray cavalry horse, was Vassenka Veslovskyin his Scotch cap with floating ribbons, his stout legs stretched out infront, obviously pleased with his own appearance. Darya Alexandrovnacould not suppress a good-humored smile as she recognized him. Behindrode Vronsky on a dark bay mare, obviously heated from galloping. He washolding her in, pulling at the reins.
After him rode a little man in the dress of a jockey. Sviazhsky andPrincess Varvara in a new _char-à-banc_ with a big, raven-black trottinghorse, overtook the party on horseback.
Anna’s face suddenly beamed with a joyful smile at the instant when, inthe little figure huddled in a corner of the old carriage, sherecognized Dolly. She uttered a cry, started in the saddle, and set herhorse into a gallop. On reaching the carriage she jumped off withoutassistance, and holding up her riding habit, she ran up to greet Dolly.
"I thought it was you and dared not think it. How delightful! You can’tfancy how glad I am!" she said, at one moment pressing her face againstDolly and kissing her, and at the next holding her off and examining herwith a smile.
"Here’s a delightful surprise, Alexey!" she said, looking round atVronsky, who had dismounted, and was walking towards them.
Vronsky, taking off his tall gray hat, went up to Dolly.
"You wouldn’t believe how glad we are to see you," he said, givingpeculiar significance to the words, and showing his strong white teethin a smile.
Vassenka Veslovsky, without getting off his horse, took off his cap andgreeted the visitor by gleefully waving the ribbons over his head.
"That’s Princess Varvara," Anna said in reply to a glance of inquiryfrom Dolly as the _char-à-banc_ drove up.
"Ah!" said Darya Alexandrovna, and unconsciously her face betrayed herdissatisfaction.
Princess Varvara was her husband’s aunt, and she had long known her, anddid not respect her. She knew that Princess Varvara had passed her wholelife toadying on her rich relations, but that she should now be spongingon Vronsky, a man who was nothing to her, mortified Dolly on account ofher kinship with her husband. Anna noticed Dolly’s expression, and wasdisconcerted by it. She blushed, dropped her riding habit, and stumbledover it.
Darya Alexandrovna went up to the _char-à-banc_ and coldly greetedPrincess Varvara. Sviazhsky too she knew. He inquired how his queerfriend with the young wife was, and running his eyes over theill-matched horses and the carriage with its patched mud-guards,proposed to the ladies that they should get into the _char-à-banc_.
"And I’ll get into this vehicle," he said. "The horse is quiet, and theprincess drives capitally."
"No, stay as you were," said Anna, coming up, "and we’ll go in thecarriage," and taking Dolly’s arm, she drew her away.
Darya Alexandrovna’s eyes were fairly dazzled by the elegant carriage ofa pattern she had never seen before, the splendid horses, and theelegant and gorgeous people surrounding her. But what struck her most ofall was the change that had taken place in Anna, whom she knew so welland loved. Any other woman, a less close observer, not knowing Annabefore, or not having thought as Darya Alexandrovna had been thinking onthe road, would not have noticed anything special in Anna. But now Dollywas struck by that temporary beauty, which is only found in women duringthe moments of love, and which she saw now in Anna’s face. Everything inher face, the clearly marked dimples in her cheeks and chin, the line ofher lips, the smile which, as it were, fluttered about her face, thebrilliance of her eyes, the grace and rapidity of her movements, thefulness of the notes of her voice, even the manner in which, with a sortof angry friendliness, she answered Veslovsky when he asked permissionto get on her cob, so as to teach it to gallop with the right legforemost—it was all peculiarly fascinating, and it seemed as if she wereherself aware of it, and rejoicing in it.
When both the women were seated in the carriage, a sudden embarrassmentcame over both of them. Anna was disconcerted by the intent look ofinquiry Dolly fixed upon her. Dolly was embarrassed because afterSviazhsky’s phrase about "this vehicle," she could not help feelingashamed of the dirty old carriage in which Anna was sitting with her.The coachman Philip and the counting house clerk were experiencing thesame sensation. The counting house clerk, to conceal his confusion,busied himself settling the ladies, but Philip the coachman becamesullen, and was bracing himself not to be overawed in future by thisexternal superiority. He smiled ironically, looking at the raven horse,and was already deciding in his own mind that this smart trotter in the_char-à-banc_ was only good for _promenade_, and wouldn’t do thirtymiles straight off in the heat.
The peasants had all got up from the cart and were inquisitively andmirthfully staring at the meeting of the friends, making their commentson it.
"They’re pleased, too; haven’t seen each other for a long while," saidthe curly-headed old man with the bast round his hair.
"I say, Uncle Gerasim, if we could take that raven horse now, to cartthe corn, that ’ud be quick work!"
"Look-ee! Is that a woman in breeches?" said one of them, pointing toVassenka Veslovsky sitting in a side saddle.
"Nay, a man! See how smartly he’s going it!"
"Eh, lads! seems we’re not going to sleep, then?"
"What chance of sleep today!" said the old man, with a sidelong look atthe sun. "Midday’s past, look-ee! Get your hooks, and come along!"


Chapter 18

Anna looked at Dolly’s thin, care-worn face, with its wrinkles filledwith dust from the road, and she was on the point of saying what she wasthinking, that is, that Dolly had got thinner. But, conscious that sheherself had grown handsomer, and that Dolly’s eyes were telling her so,she sighed and began to speak about herself.
"You are looking at me," she said, "and wondering how I can be happy inmy position? Well! it’s shameful to confess, but I ... I’m inexcusablyhappy. Something magical has happened to me, like a dream, when you’refrightened, panic-stricken, and all of a sudden you wake up and all thehorrors are no more. I have waked up. I have lived through the misery,the dread, and now for a long while past, especially since we’ve beenhere, I’ve been so happy!..." she said, with a timid smile of inquirylooking at Dolly.
"How glad I am!" said Dolly smiling, involuntarily speaking more coldlythan she wanted to. "I’m very glad for you. Why haven’t you written tome?"
"Why?... Because I hadn’t the courage.... You forget my position..."
"To me? Hadn’t the courage? If you knew how I ... I look at..."
Darya Alexandrovna wanted to express her thoughts of the morning, butfor some reason it seemed to her now out of place to do so.
"But of that we’ll talk later. What’s this, what are all thesebuildings?" she asked, wanting to change the conversation and pointingto the red and green roofs that came into view behind the green hedgesof acacia and lilac. "Quite a little town."
But Anna did not answer.
"No, no! How do you look at my position, what do you think of it?" sheasked.
"I consider..." Darya Alexandrovna was beginning, but at that instantVassenka Veslovsky, having brought the cob to gallop with the right legforemost, galloped past them, bumping heavily up and down in his shortjacket on the chamois leather of the side saddle. "He’s doing it, AnnaArkadyevna!" he shouted.
Anna did not even glance at him; but again it seemed to DaryaAlexandrovna out of place to enter upon such a long conversation in thecarriage, and so she cut short her thought.
"I don’t think anything," she said, "but I always loved you, and if oneloves anyone, one loves the whole person, just as they are and not asone would like them to be...."
Anna, taking her eyes off her friend’s face and dropping her eyelids(this was a new habit Dolly had not seen in her before), pondered,trying to penetrate the full significance of the words. And obviouslyinterpreting them as she would have wished, she glanced at Dolly.
"If you had any sins," she said, "they would all be forgiven you foryour coming to see me and these words."
And Dolly saw that tears stood in her eyes. She pressed Anna’s hand insilence.
"Well, what are these buildings? How many there are of them!" After amoment’s silence she repeated her question.
"These are the servants’ houses, barns, and stables," answered Anna."And there the park begins. It had all gone to ruin, but Alexey hadeverything renewed. He is very fond of this place, and, what I neverexpected, he has become intensely interested in looking after it. Buthis is such a rich nature! Whatever he takes up, he does splendidly. Sofar from being bored by it, he works with passionate interest. He—withhis temperament as I know it—he has become careful and businesslike, afirst-rate manager, he positively reckons every penny in his managementof the land. But only in that. When it’s a question of tens ofthousands, he doesn’t think of money." She spoke with that gleefully slysmile with which women often talk of the secret characteristics onlyknown to them—of those they love. "Do you see that big building? that’sthe new hospital. I believe it will cost over a hundred thousand; that’shis hobby just now. And do you know how it all came about? The peasantsasked him for some meadowland, I think it was, at a cheaper rate, and herefused, and I accused him of being miserly. Of course it was not reallybecause of that, but everything together, he began this hospital toprove, do you see, that he was not miserly about money. _C’est unepetitesse_, if you like, but I love him all the more for it. And nowyou’ll see the house in a moment. It was his grandfather’s house, and hehas had nothing changed outside."
"How beautiful!" said Dolly, looking with involuntary admiration at thehandsome house with columns, standing out among the different-coloredgreens of the old trees in the garden.
"Isn’t it fine? And from the house, from the top, the view iswonderful."
They drove into a courtyard strewn with gravel and bright with flowers,in which two laborers were at work putting an edging of stones round thelight mould of a flower bed, and drew up in a covered entry.
"Ah, they’re here already!" said Anna, looking at the saddle horses,which were just being led away from the steps. "It is a nice horse,isn’t it? It’s my cob; my favorite. Lead him here and bring me somesugar. Where is the count?" she inquired of two smart footmen who dartedout. "Ah, there he is!" she said, seeing Vronsky coming to meet her withVeslovsky.
"Where are you going to put the princess?" said Vronsky in French,addressing Anna, and without waiting for a reply, he once more greetedDarya Alexandrovna, and this time he kissed her hand. "I think the bigbalcony room."
"Oh, no, that’s too far off! Better in the corner room, we shall seeeach other more. Come, let’s go up," said Anna, as she gave her favoritehorse the sugar the footman had brought her.
"_Et vous oubliez votre devoir_," she said to Veslovsky, who came outtoo on the steps.
"_Pardon, j’en ai tout plein les poches_," he answered, smiling, puttinghis fingers in his waistcoat pocket.
"_Mais vous venez trop tard_," she said, rubbing her handkerchief on herhand, which the horse had made wet in taking the sugar.
Anna turned to Dolly. "You can stay some time? For one day only? That’simpossible!"
"I promised to be back, and the children..." said Dolly, feelingembarrassed both because she had to get her bag out of the carriage, andbecause she knew her face must be covered with dust.
"No, Dolly, darling!... Well, we’ll see. Come along, come along!" andAnna led Dolly to her room.
That room was not the smart guest chamber Vronsky had suggested, but theone of which Anna had said that Dolly would excuse it. And this room,for which excuse was needed, was more full of luxury than any in whichDolly had ever stayed, a luxury that reminded her of the best hotelsabroad.
"Well, darling, how happy I am!" Anna said, sitting down in her ridinghabit for a moment beside Dolly. "Tell me about all of you. Stiva I hadonly a glimpse of, and he cannot tell one about the children. How is myfavorite, Tanya? Quite a big girl, I expect?"
"Yes, she’s very tall," Darya Alexandrovna answered shortly, surprisedherself that she should respond so coolly about her children. "We arehaving a delightful stay at the Levins’," she added.
"Oh, if I had known," said Anna, "that you do not despise me!... Youmight have all come to us. Stiva’s an old friend and a great friend ofAlexey’s, you know," she added, and suddenly she blushed.
"Yes, but we are all..." Dolly answered in confusion.
"But in my delight I’m talking nonsense. The one thing, darling, is thatI am so glad to have you!" said Anna, kissing her again. "You haven’ttold me yet how and what you think about me, and I keep wanting to know.But I’m glad you will see me as I am. The chief thing I shouldn’t likewould be for people to imagine I want to prove anything. I don’t want toprove anything; I merely want to live, to do no one harm but myself. Ihave the right to do that, haven’t I? But it is a big subject, and we’lltalk over everything properly later. Now I’ll go and dress and send amaid to you."


Chapter 19

Left alone, Darya Alexandrovna, with a good housewife’s eye, scanned herroom. All she had seen in entering the house and walking through it, andall she saw now in her room, gave her an impression of wealth andsumptuousness and of that modern European luxury of which she had onlyread in English novels, but had never seen in Russia and in the country.Everything was new from the new French hangings on the walls to thecarpet which covered the whole floor. The bed had a spring mattress, anda special sort of bolster and silk pillowcases on the little pillows.The marble washstand, the dressing table, the little sofa, the tables,the bronze clock on the chimney piece, the window curtains, and the_portières_ were all new and expensive.
The smart maid, who came in to offer her services, with her hair done uphigh, and a gown more fashionable than Dolly’s, was as new and expensiveas the whole room. Darya Alexandrovna liked her neatness, herdeferential and obliging manners, but she felt ill at ease with her. Shefelt ashamed of her seeing the patched dressing jacket that hadunluckily been packed by mistake for her. She was ashamed of the verypatches and darned places of which she had been so proud at home. Athome it had been so clear that for six dressing jackets there would beneeded twenty-four yards of nainsook at sixteen pence the yard, whichwas a matter of thirty shillings besides the cutting-out and making, andthese thirty shillings had been saved. But before the maid she felt, ifnot exactly ashamed, at least uncomfortable.
Darya Alexandrovna had a great sense of relief when Annushka, whom shehad known for years, walked in. The smart maid was sent for to go to hermistress, and Annushka remained with Darya Alexandrovna.
Annushka was obviously much pleased at that lady’s arrival, and began tochatter away without a pause. Dolly observed that she was longing toexpress her opinion in regard to her mistress’s position, especially asto the love and devotion of the count to Anna Arkadyevna, but Dollycarefully interrupted her whenever she began to speak about this.
"I grew up with Anna Arkadyevna; my lady’s dearer to me than anything.Well, it’s not for us to judge. And, to be sure, there seems so muchlove..."
"Kindly pour out the water for me to wash now, please," DaryaAlexandrovna cut her short.
"Certainly. We’ve two women kept specially for washing small things, butmost of the linen’s done by machinery. The count goes into everythinghimself. Ah, what a husband!..."
Dolly was glad when Anna came in, and by her entrance put a stop toAnnushka’s gossip.
Anna had put on a very simple batiste gown. Dolly scrutinized thatsimple gown attentively. She knew what it meant, and the price at whichsuch simplicity was obtained.
"An old friend," said Anna of Annushka.
Anna was not embarrassed now. She was perfectly composed and at ease.Dolly saw that she had now completely recovered from the impression herarrival had made on her, and had assumed that superficial, careless tonewhich, as it were, closed the door on that compartment in which herdeeper feelings and ideas were kept.
"Well, Anna, and how is your little girl?" asked Dolly.
"Annie?" (This was what she called her little daughter Anna.) "Verywell. She has got on wonderfully. Would you like to see her? Come, I’llshow her to you. We had a terrible bother," she began telling her, "overnurses. We had an Italian wet-nurse. A good creature, but so stupid! Wewanted to get rid of her, but the baby is so used to her that we’ve goneon keeping her still."
"But how have you managed?..." Dolly was beginning a question as to whatname the little girl would have; but noticing a sudden frown on Anna’sface, she changed the drift of her question.
"How did you manage? have you weaned her yet?"
But Anna had understood.
"You didn’t mean to ask that? You meant to ask about her surname. Yes?That worries Alexey. She has no name—that is, she’s a Karenina," saidAnna, dropping her eyelids till nothing could be seen but the eyelashesmeeting. "But we’ll talk about all that later," her face suddenlybrightening. "Come, I’ll show you her. _Elle est très gentille_. Shecrawls now."
In the nursery the luxury which had impressed Dolly in the whole housestruck her still more. There were little go-carts ordered from England,and appliances for learning to walk, and a sofa after the fashion of abilliard table, purposely constructed for crawling, and swings andbaths, all of special pattern, and modern. They were all English, solid,and of good make, and obviously very expensive. The room was large, andvery light and lofty.
When they went in, the baby, with nothing on but her little smock, wassitting in a little elbow chair at the table, having her dinner ofbroth, which she was spilling all over her little chest. The baby wasbeing fed, and the Russian nursery maid was evidently sharing her meal.Neither the wet-nurse nor the head nurse were there; they were in thenext room, from which came the sound of their conversation in the queerFrench which was their only means of communication.
Hearing Anna’s voice, a smart, tall, English nurse with a disagreeableface and a dissolute expression walked in at the door, hurriedly shakingher fair curls, and immediately began to defend herself though Anna hadnot found fault with her. At every word Anna said, the English nursesaid hurriedly several times, "Yes, my lady."
The rosy baby with her black eyebrows and hair, her sturdy red littlebody with tight goose-flesh skin, delighted Darya Alexandrovna in spiteof the cross expression with which she stared at the stranger. Shepositively envied the baby’s healthy appearance. She was delighted, too,at the baby’s crawling. Not one of her own children had crawled likethat. When the baby was put on the carpet and its little dress tucked upbehind, it was wonderfully charming. Looking round like some little wildanimal at the grown-up big people with her bright black eyes, shesmiled, unmistakably pleased at their admiring her, and holding her legssideways, she pressed vigorously on her arms, and rapidly drew her wholeback up after, and then made another step forward with her little arms.
But the whole atmosphere of the nursery, and especially the Englishnurse, Darya Alexandrovna did not like at all. It was only on thesupposition that no good nurse would have entered so irregular ahousehold as Anna’s that Darya Alexandrovna could explain to herself howAnna with her insight into people could take such an unprepossessing,disreputable-looking woman as nurse to her child.
Besides, from a few words that were dropped, Darya Alexandrovna saw atonce that Anna, the two nurses, and the child had no common existence,and that the mother’s visit was something exceptional. Anna wanted toget the baby her plaything, and could not find it.
Most amazing of all was the fact that on being asked how many teeth thebaby had, Anna answered wrong, and knew nothing about the two lastteeth.
"I sometimes feel sorry I’m so superfluous here," said Anna, going outof the nursery and holding up her skirt so as to escape the playthingstanding in the doorway. "It was very different with my first child."
"I expected it to be the other way," said Darya Alexandrovna shyly.
"Oh, no! By the way, do you know I saw Seryozha?" said Anna, screwing upher eyes, as though looking at something far away. "But we’ll talk aboutthat later. You wouldn’t believe it, I’m like a hungry beggar woman whena full dinner is set before her, and she does not know what to begin onfirst. The dinner is you, and the talks I have before me with you, whichI could never have with anyone else; and I don’t know which subject tobegin upon first. _Mais je ne vous ferai grace de rien_. I must haveeverything out with you."
"Oh, I ought to give you a sketch of the company you will meet with us,"she went on. "I’ll begin with the ladies. Princess Varvara—you know her,and I know your opinion and Stiva’s about her. Stiva says the whole aimof her existence is to prove her superiority over Auntie KaterinaPavlovna: that’s all true; but she’s a good-natured woman, and I am sograteful to her. In Petersburg there was a moment when a chaperon wasabsolutely essential for me. Then she turned up. But really she isgood-natured. She did a great deal to alleviate my position. I see youdon’t understand all the difficulty of my position ... there inPetersburg," she added. "Here I’m perfectly at ease and happy. Well, ofthat later on, though. Then Sviazhsky—he’s the marshal of the district,and he’s a very good sort of a man, but he wants to get something out ofAlexey. You understand, with his property, now that we are settled inthe country, Alexey can exercise great influence. Then there’sTushkevitch—you have seen him, you know—Betsy’s admirer. Now he’s beenthrown over and he’s come to see us. As Alexey says, he’s one of thosepeople who are very pleasant if one accepts them for what they try toappear to be, _et puis il est comme il faut_, as Princess Varvara says.Then Veslovsky ... you know him. A very nice boy," she said, and a slysmile curved her lips. "What’s this wild story about him and the Levins?Veslovsky told Alexey about it, and we don’t believe it. _Il est trèsgentil et naïf_," she said again with the same smile. "Men needoccupation, and Alexey needs a circle, so I value all these people. Wehave to have the house lively and gay, so that Alexey may not long forany novelty. Then you’ll see the steward—a German, a very good fellow,and he understands his work. Alexey has a very high opinion of him. Thenthe doctor, a young man, not quite a Nihilist perhaps, but you know,eats with his knife ... but a very good doctor. Then the architect...._Une petite cour!_"


Chapter 20

"Here’s Dolly for you, princess, you were so anxious to see her," saidAnna, coming out with Darya Alexandrovna onto the stone terrace wherePrincess Varvara was sitting in the shade at an embroidery frame,working at a cover for Count Alexey Kirillovitch’s easy chair. "She saysshe doesn’t want anything before dinner, but please order some lunch forher, and I’ll go and look for Alexey and bring them all in."
Princess Varvara gave Dolly a cordial and rather patronizing reception,and began at once explaining to her that she was living with Annabecause she had always cared more for her than her sister KaterinaPavlovna, the aunt that had brought Anna up, and that now, when everyone had abandoned Anna, she thought it her duty to help her in this mostdifficult period of transition.
"Her husband will give her a divorce, and then I shall go back to mysolitude; but now I can be of use, and I am doing my duty, howeverdifficult it may be for me—not like some other people. And how sweet itis of you, how right of you to have come! They live like the best ofmarried couples; it’s for God to judge them, not for us. And didn’tBiryuzovsky and Madame Avenieva ... and Sam Nikandrov, and Vassiliev andMadame Mamonova, and Liza Neptunova... Did no one say anything aboutthem? And it has ended by their being received by everyone. And then,_c’est un intérieur si joli, si comme il faut. Tout-à-fait à l’anglaise.On se réunit le matin au breakfast, et puis on se sépare._ Everyone doesas he pleases till dinnertime. Dinner at seven o’clock. Stiva did veryrightly to send you. He needs their support. You know that through hismother and brother he can do anything. And then they do so much good. Hedidn’t tell you about his hospital? _Ce sera admirable_—everything fromParis."
Their conversation was interrupted by Anna, who had found the men of theparty in the billiard room, and returned with them to the terrace. Therewas still a long time before the dinner-hour, it was exquisite weather,and so several different methods of spending the next two hours wereproposed. There were very many methods of passing the time atVozdvizhenskoe, and these were all unlike those in use at Pokrovskoe.
"_Une partie de lawn-tennis,_" Veslovsky proposed, with his handsomesmile. "We’ll be partners again, Anna Arkadyevna."
"No, it’s too hot; better stroll about the garden and have a row in theboat, show Darya Alexandrovna the river banks." Vronsky proposed.
"I agree to anything," said Sviazhsky.
"I imagine that what Dolly would like best would be a stroll—wouldn’tyou? And then the boat, perhaps," said Anna.
So it was decided. Veslovsky and Tushkevitch went off to the bathingplace, promising to get the boat ready and to wait there for them.
They walked along the path in two couples, Anna with Sviazhsky, andDolly with Vronsky. Dolly was a little embarrassed and anxious in thenew surroundings in which she found herself. Abstractly, theoretically,she did not merely justify, she positively approved of Anna’s conduct.As is indeed not unfrequent with women of unimpeachable virtue, weary ofthe monotony of respectable existence, at a distance she not onlyexcused illicit love, she positively envied it. Besides, she loved Annawith all her heart. But seeing Anna in actual life among thesestrangers, with this fashionable tone that was so new to DaryaAlexandrovna, she felt ill at ease. What she disliked particularly wasseeing Princess Varvara ready to overlook everything for the sake of thecomforts she enjoyed.
As a general principle, abstractly, Dolly approved of Anna’s action; butto see the man for whose sake her action had been taken was disagreeableto her. Moreover, she had never liked Vronsky. She thought him veryproud, and saw nothing in him of which he could be proud except hiswealth. But against her own will, here in his own house, he overawed hermore than ever, and she could not be at ease with him. She felt with himthe same feeling she had had with the maid about her dressing jacket.Just as with the maid she had felt not exactly ashamed, but embarrassedat her darns, so she felt with him not exactly ashamed, but embarrassedat herself.
Dolly was ill at ease, and tried to find a subject of conversation. Eventhough she supposed that, through his pride, praise of his house andgarden would be sure to be disagreeable to him, she did all the sametell him how much she liked his house.
"Yes, it’s a very fine building, and in the good old-fashioned style,"he said.
"I like so much the court in front of the steps. Was that always so?"
"Oh, no!" he said, and his face beamed with pleasure. "If you could onlyhave seen that court last spring!"
And he began, at first rather diffidently, but more and more carriedaway by the subject as he went on, to draw her attention to the variousdetails of the decoration of his house and garden. It was evident that,having devoted a great deal of trouble to improve and beautify his home,Vronsky felt a need to show off the improvements to a new person, andwas genuinely delighted at Darya Alexandrovna’s praise.
"If you would care to look at the hospital, and are not tired, indeed,it’s not far. Shall we go?" he said, glancing into her face to convincehimself that she was not bored. "Are you coming, Anna?" he turned toher.
"We will come, won’t we?" she said, addressing Sviazhsky. "_Mais il nefaut pas laisser le pauvre Veslovsky et Tushkevitch se morfondre là dansle bateau._ We must send and tell them."
"Yes, this is a monument he is setting up here," said Anna, turning toDolly with that sly smile of comprehension with which she had previouslytalked about the hospital.
"Oh, it’s a work of real importance!" said Sviazhsky. But to show he wasnot trying to ingratiate himself with Vronsky, he promptly added someslightly critical remarks.
"I wonder, though, count," he said, "that while you do so much for thehealth of the peasants, you take so little interest in the schools."
"_C’est devenu tellement commun les écoles,_" said Vronsky. "Youunderstand it’s not on that account, but it just happens so, my interesthas been diverted elsewhere. This way then to the hospital," he said toDarya Alexandrovna, pointing to a turning out of the avenue.
The ladies put up their parasols and turned into the side path. Aftergoing down several turnings, and going through a little gate, DaryaAlexandrovna saw standing on rising ground before her a largepretentious-looking red building, almost finished. The iron roof, whichwas not yet painted, shone with dazzling brightness in the sunshine.Beside the finished building another had been begun, surrounded byscaffolding. Workmen in aprons, standing on scaffolds, were layingbricks, pouring mortar out of vats, and smoothing it with trowels.
"How quickly work gets done with you!" said Sviazhsky. "When I was herelast time the roof was not on."
"By the autumn it will all be ready. Inside almost everything is done,"said Anna.
"And what’s this new building?"
"That’s the house for the doctor and the dispensary," answered Vronsky,seeing the architect in a short jacket coming towards him; and excusinghimself to the ladies, he went to meet him.
Going round a hole where the workmen were slaking lime, he stood stillwith the architect and began talking rather warmly.
"The front is still too low," he said to Anna, who had asked what wasthe matter.
"I said the foundation ought to be raised," said Anna.
"Yes, of course it would have been much better, Anna Arkadyevna," saidthe architect, "but now it’s too late."
"Yes, I take a great interest in it," Anna answered Sviazhsky, who wasexpressing his surprise at her knowledge of architecture. "This newbuilding ought to have been in harmony with the hospital. It was anafterthought, and was begun without a plan."
Vronsky, having finished his talk with the architect, joined the ladies,and led them inside the hospital.
Although they were still at work on the cornices outside and werepainting on the ground floor, upstairs almost all the rooms werefinished. Going up the broad cast-iron staircase to the landing, theywalked into the first large room. The walls were stuccoed to look likemarble, the huge plate-glass windows were already in, only the parquetfloor was not yet finished, and the carpenters, who were planing a blockof it, left their work, taking off the bands that fastened their hair,to greet the gentry.
"This is the reception room," said Vronsky. "Here there will be a desk,tables, and benches, and nothing more."
"This way; let us go in here. Don’t go near the window," said Anna,trying the paint to see if it were dry. "Alexey, the paint’s dryalready," she added.
From the reception room they went into the corridor. Here Vronsky showedthem the mechanism for ventilation on a novel system. Then he showedthem marble baths, and beds with extraordinary springs. Then he showedthem the wards one after another, the storeroom, the linen room, thenthe heating stove of a new pattern, then the trolleys, which would makeno noise as they carried everything needed along the corridors, and manyother things. Sviazhsky, as a connoisseur in the latest mechanicalimprovements, appreciated everything fully. Dolly simply wondered at allshe had not seen before, and, anxious to understand it all, made minuteinquiries about everything, which gave Vronsky great satisfaction.
"Yes, I imagine that this will be the solitary example of a properlyfitted hospital in Russia," said Sviazhsky.
"And won’t you have a lying-in ward?" asked Dolly. "That’s so muchneeded in the country. I have often..."
In spite of his usual courtesy, Vronsky interrupted her.
"This is not a lying-in home, but a hospital for the sick, and isintended for all diseases, except infectious complaints," he said. "Ah!look at this," and he rolled up to Darya Alexandrovna an invalid chairthat had just been ordered for the convalescents. "Look." He sat down inthe chair and began moving it. "The patient can’t walk—still too weak,perhaps, or something wrong with his legs, but he must have air, and hemoves, rolls himself along...."
Darya Alexandrovna was interested by everything. She liked everythingvery much, but most of all she liked Vronsky himself with his natural,simple-hearted eagerness. "Yes, he’s a very nice, good man," she thoughtseveral times, not hearing what he said, but looking at him andpenetrating into his expression, while she mentally put herself inAnna’s place. She liked him so much just now with his eager interestthat she saw how Anna could be in love with him.


Chapter 21

"No, I think the princess is tired, and horses don’t interest her,"Vronsky said to Anna, who wanted to go on to the stables, whereSviazhsky wished to see the new stallion. "You go on, while I escort theprincess home, and we’ll have a little talk," he said, "if you wouldlike that?" he added, turning to her.
"I know nothing about horses, and I shall be delighted," answered DaryaAlexandrovna, rather astonished.
She saw by Vronsky’s face that he wanted something from her. She was notmistaken. As soon as they had passed through the little gate back intothe garden, he looked in the direction Anna had taken, and having madesure that she could neither hear nor see them, he began:
"You guess that I have something I want to say to you," he said, lookingat her with laughing eyes. "I am not wrong in believing you to be afriend of Anna’s." He took off his hat, and taking out his handkerchief,wiped his head, which was growing bald.
Darya Alexandrovna made no answer, and merely stared at him with dismay.When she was left alone with him, she suddenly felt afraid; his laughingeyes and stern expression scared her.
The most diverse suppositions as to what he was about to speak of to herflashed into her brain. "He is going to beg me to come to stay with themwith the children, and I shall have to refuse; or to create a set thatwill receive Anna in Moscow.... Or isn’t it Vassenka Veslovsky and hisrelations with Anna? Or perhaps about Kitty, that he feels he was toblame?" All her conjectures were unpleasant, but she did not guess whathe really wanted to talk about to her.
"You have so much influence with Anna, she is so fond of you," he said;"do help me."
Darya Alexandrovna looked with timid inquiry into his energetic face,which under the lime-trees was continually being lighted up in patchesby the sunshine, and then passing into complete shadow again. She waitedfor him to say more, but he walked in silence beside her, scratchingwith his cane in the gravel.
"You have come to see us, you, the only woman of Anna’s former friends—Idon’t count Princess Varvara—but I know that you have done this notbecause you regard our position as normal, but because, understandingall the difficulty of the position, you still love her and want to be ahelp to her. Have I understood you rightly?" he asked, looking round ather.
"Oh, yes," answered Darya Alexandrovna, putting down her sunshade,"but..."
"No," he broke in, and unconsciously, oblivious of the awkward positioninto which he was putting his companion, he stopped abruptly, so thatshe had to stop short too. "No one feels more deeply and intensely thanI do all the difficulty of Anna’s position; and that you may wellunderstand, if you do me the honor of supposing I have any heart. I amto blame for that position, and that is why I feel it."
"I understand," said Darya Alexandrovna, involuntarily admiring thesincerity and firmness with which he said this. "But just because youfeel yourself responsible, you exaggerate it, I am afraid," she said."Her position in the world is difficult, I can well understand."
"In the world it is hell!" he brought out quickly, frowning darkly. "Youcan’t imagine moral sufferings greater than what she went through inPetersburg in that fortnight ... and I beg you to believe it."
"Yes, but here, so long as neither Anna ... nor you miss society..."
"Society!" he said contemptuously, "how could I miss society?"
"So far—and it may be so always—you are happy and at peace. I see inAnna that she is happy, perfectly happy, she has had time to tell me somuch already," said Darya Alexandrovna, smiling; and involuntarily, asshe said this, at the same moment a doubt entered her mind whether Annareally were happy.
But Vronsky, it appeared, had no doubts on that score.
"Yes, yes," he said, "I know that she has revived after all hersufferings; she is happy. She is happy in the present. But I?... I amafraid of what is before us ... I beg your pardon, you would like towalk on?"
"No, I don’t mind."
"Well, then, let us sit here."
Darya Alexandrovna sat down on a garden seat in a corner of the avenue.He stood up facing her.
"I see that she is happy," he repeated, and the doubt whether she werehappy sank more deeply into Darya Alexandrovna’s mind. "But can it last?Whether we have acted rightly or wrongly is another question, but thedie is cast," he said, passing from Russian to French, "and we are boundtogether for life. We are united by all the ties of love that we holdmost sacred. We have a child, we may have other children. But the lawand all the conditions of our position are such that thousands ofcomplications arise which she does not see and does not want to see. Andthat one can well understand. But I can’t help seeing them. My daughteris by law not my daughter, but Karenin’s. I cannot bear this falsity!"he said, with a vigorous gesture of refusal, and he looked with gloomyinquiry towards Darya Alexandrovna.
She made no answer, but simply gazed at him. He went on:
"One day a son may be born, my son, and he will be legally a Karenin; hewill not be the heir of my name nor of my property, and however happy wemay be in our home life and however many children we may have, therewill be no real tie between us. They will be Karenins. You canunderstand the bitterness and horror of this position! I have tried tospeak of this to Anna. It irritates her. She does not understand, and toher I cannot speak plainly of all this. Now look at another side. I amhappy, happy in her love, but I must have occupation. I have foundoccupation, and am proud of what I am doing and consider it nobler thanthe pursuits of my former companions at court and in the army. And mostcertainly I would not change the work I am doing for theirs. I amworking here, settled in my own place, and I am happy and contented, andwe need nothing more to make us happy. I love my work here. _Ce n’estpas un pis-aller,_ on the contrary..."
Darya Alexandrovna noticed that at this point in his explanation he grewconfused, and she did not quite understand this digression, but she feltthat having once begun to speak of matters near his heart, of which hecould not speak to Anna, he was now making a clean breast of everything,and that the question of his pursuits in the country fell into the samecategory of matters near his heart, as the question of his relationswith Anna.
"Well, I will go on," he said, collecting himself. "The great thing isthat as I work I want to have a conviction that what I am doing will notdie with me, that I shall have heirs to come after me,—and this I havenot. Conceive the position of a man who knows that his children, thechildren of the woman he loves, will not be his, but will belong tosomeone who hates them and cares nothing about them! It is awful!"
He paused, evidently much moved.
"Yes, indeed, I see that. But what can Anna do?" queried DaryaAlexandrovna.
"Yes, that brings me to the object of my conversation," he said, calminghimself with an effort. "Anna can, it depends on her.... Even topetition the Tsar for legitimization, a divorce is essential. And thatdepends on Anna. Her husband agreed to a divorce—at that time yourhusband had arranged it completely. And now, I know, he would not refuseit. It is only a matter of writing to him. He said plainly at that timethat if she expressed the desire, he would not refuse. Of course," hesaid gloomily, "it is one of those Pharisaical cruelties of which onlysuch heartless men are capable. He knows what agony any recollection ofhim must give her, and knowing her, he must have a letter from her. Ican understand that it is agony to her. But the matter is of suchimportance, that one must _passer pardessus toutes ces finesses desentiment. Il y va du bonheur et de l’existence d’Anne et de sesenfants._ I won’t speak of myself, though it’s hard for me, very hard,"he said, with an expression as though he were threatening someone forits being hard for him. "And so it is, princess, that I am shamelesslyclutching at you as an anchor of salvation. Help me to persuade her towrite to him and ask for a divorce."
"Yes, of course," Darya Alexandrovna said dreamily, as she vividlyrecalled her last interview with Alexey Alexandrovitch. "Yes, ofcourse," she repeated with decision, thinking of Anna.
"Use your influence with her, make her write. I don’t like—I’m almostunable to speak about this to her."
"Very well, I will talk to her. But how is it she does not think of itherself?" said Darya Alexandrovna, and for some reason she suddenly atthat point recalled Anna’s strange new habit of half-closing her eyes.And she remembered that Anna drooped her eyelids just when the deeperquestions of life were touched upon. "Just as though she half-shut hereyes to her own life, so as not to see everything," thought Dolly. "Yes,indeed, for my own sake and for hers I will talk to her," Dolly said inreply to his look of gratitude.
They got up and walked to the house.


Chapter 22

When Anna found Dolly at home before her, she looked intently in hereyes, as though questioning her about the talk she had had with Vronsky,but she made no inquiry in words.
"I believe it’s dinner time," she said. "We’ve not seen each other atall yet. I am reckoning on the evening. Now I want to go and dress. Iexpect you do too; we all got splashed at the buildings."
Dolly went to her room and she felt amused. To change her dress wasimpossible, for she had already put on her best dress. But in order tosignify in some way her preparation for dinner, she asked the maid tobrush her dress, changed her cuffs and tie, and put some lace on herhead.
"This is all I can do," she said with a smile to Anna, who came in toher in a third dress, again of extreme simplicity.
"Yes, we are too formal here," she said, as it were apologizing for hermagnificence. "Alexey is delighted at your visit, as he rarely is atanything. He has completely lost his heart to you," she added. "You’renot tired?"
There was no time for talking about anything before dinner. Going intothe drawing room they found Princess Varvara already there, and thegentlemen of the party in black frock-coats. The architect wore aswallow-tail coat. Vronsky presented the doctor and the steward to hisguest. The architect he had already introduced to her at the hospital.
A stout butler, resplendent with a smoothly shaven round chin and astarched white cravat, announced that dinner was ready, and the ladiesgot up. Vronsky asked Sviazhsky to take in Anna Arkadyevna, and himselfoffered his arm to Dolly. Veslovsky was before Tushkevitch in offeringhis arm to Princess Varvara, so that Tushkevitch with the steward andthe doctor walked in alone.
The dinner, the dining room, the service, the waiting at table, thewine, and the food, were not simply in keeping with the general tone ofmodern luxury throughout all the house, but seemed even more sumptuousand modern. Darya Alexandrovna watched this luxury which was novel toher, and as a good housekeeper used to managing a household—although shenever dreamed of adapting anything she saw to her own household, as itwas all in a style of luxury far above her own manner of living—shecould not help scrutinizing every detail, and wondering how and by whomit was all done. Vassenka Veslovsky, her husband, and even Sviazhsky,and many other people she knew, would never have considered thisquestion, and would have readily believed what every well-bred hosttries to make his guests feel, that is, that all that is well-ordered inhis house has cost him, the host, no trouble whatever, but comes ofitself. Darya Alexandrovna was well aware that even porridge for thechildren’s breakfast does not come of itself, and that therefore, whereso complicated and magnificent a style of luxury was maintained, someonemust give earnest attention to its organization. And from the glancewith which Alexey Kirillovitch scanned the table, from the way he noddedto the butler, and offered Darya Alexandrovna her choice between coldsoup and hot soup, she saw that it was all organized and maintained bythe care of the master of the house himself. It was evident that it allrested no more upon Anna than upon Veslovsky. She, Sviazhsky, theprincess, and Veslovsky, were equally guests, with light hearts enjoyingwhat had been arranged for them.
Anna was the hostess only in conducting the conversation. Theconversation was a difficult one for the lady of the house at a smalltable with persons present, like the steward and the architect,belonging to a completely different world, struggling not to be overawedby an elegance to which they were unaccustomed, and unable to sustain alarge share in the general conversation. But this difficult conversationAnna directed with her usual tact and naturalness, and indeed she did sowith actual enjoyment, as Darya Alexandrovna observed. The conversationbegan about the row Tushkevitch and Veslovsky had taken alone togetherin the boat, and Tushkevitch began describing the last boat races inPetersburg at the Yacht Club. But Anna, seizing the first pause, at onceturned to the architect to draw him out of his silence.
"Nikolay Ivanitch was struck," she said, meaning Sviazhsky, "at theprogress the new building had made since he was here last; but I amthere every day, and every day I wonder at the rate at which it grows."
"It’s first-rate working with his excellency," said the architect with asmile (he was respectful and composed, though with a sense of his owndignity). "It’s a very different matter to have to do with the districtauthorities. Where one would have to write out sheaves of papers, here Icall upon the count, and in three words we settle the business."
"The American way of doing business," said Sviazhsky, with a smile.
"Yes, there they build in a rational fashion..."
The conversation passed to the misuse of political power in the UnitedStates, but Anna quickly brought it round to another topic, so as todraw the steward into talk.
"Have you ever seen a reaping machine?" she said, addressing DaryaAlexandrovna. "We had just ridden over to look at one when we met. It’sthe first time I ever saw one."
"How do they work?" asked Dolly.
"Exactly like little scissors. A plank and a lot of little scissors.Like this."
Anna took a knife and fork in her beautiful white hands covered withrings, and began showing how the machine worked. It was clear that shesaw nothing would be understood from her explanation; but aware that hertalk was pleasant and her hands beautiful she went on explaining.
"More like little penknives," Veslovsky said playfully, never taking hiseyes off her.
Anna gave a just perceptible smile, but made no answer. "Isn’t it true,Karl Fedoritch, that it’s just like little scissors?" she said to thesteward.
"_Oh, ja,_" answered the German. _"Es ist ein ganz einfaches Ding,"_ andhe began to explain the construction of the machine.
"It’s a pity it doesn’t bind too. I saw one at the Vienna exhibition,which binds with a wire," said Sviazhsky. "They would be more profitablein use."
_"Es kommt drauf an.... Der Preis vom Draht muss ausgerechnet werden."_And the German, roused from his taciturnity, turned to Vronsky. _"Daslässt sich ausrechnen, Erlaucht."_ The German was just feeling in thepocket where were his pencil and the notebook he always wrote in, butrecollecting that he was at a dinner, and observing Vronsky’s chillyglance, he checked himself. _"Zu compliziert, macht zu viel Klopot,"_ heconcluded.
_"Wünscht man Dochots, so hat man auch Klopots,"_ said VassenkaVeslovsky, mimicking the German. _"J’adore l’allemand,"_ he addressedAnna again with the same smile.
_"Cessez,"_ she said with playful severity.
"We expected to find you in the fields, Vassily Semyonitch," she said tothe doctor, a sickly-looking man; "have you been there?"
"I went there, but I had taken flight," the doctor answered with gloomyjocoseness.
"Then you’ve taken a good constitutional?"
"Splendid!"
"Well, and how was the old woman? I hope it’s not typhus?"
"Typhus it is not, but it’s taking a bad turn."
"What a pity!" said Anna, and having thus paid the dues of civility toher domestic circle, she turned to her own friends.
"It would be a hard task, though, to construct a machine from yourdescription, Anna Arkadyevna," Sviazhsky said jestingly.
"Oh, no, why so?" said Anna with a smile that betrayed that she knewthere was something charming in her disquisitions upon the machine thathad been noticed by Sviazhsky. This new trait of girlish coquettishnessmade an unpleasant impression on Dolly.
"But Anna Arkadyevna’s knowledge of architecture is marvelous," saidTushkevitch.
"To be sure, I heard Anna Arkadyevna talking yesterday about plinths anddamp-courses," said Veslovsky. "Have I got it right?"
"There’s nothing marvelous about it, when one sees and hears so much ofit," said Anna. "But, I dare say, you don’t even know what houses aremade of?"
Darya Alexandrovna saw that Anna disliked the tone of raillery thatexisted between her and Veslovsky, but fell in with it against her will.
Vronsky acted in this matter quite differently from Levin. He obviouslyattached no significance to Veslovsky’s chattering; on the contrary, heencouraged his jests.
"Come now, tell us, Veslovsky, how are the stones held together?"
"By cement, of course."
"Bravo! And what is cement?"
"Oh, some sort of paste ... no, putty," said Veslovsky, raising ageneral laugh.
The company at dinner, with the exception of the doctor, the architect,and the steward, who remained plunged in gloomy silence, kept up aconversation that never paused, glancing off one subject, fastening onanother, and at times stinging one or the other to the quick. Once DaryaAlexandrovna felt wounded to the quick, and got so hot that shepositively flushed and wondered afterwards whether she had said anythingextreme or unpleasant. Sviazhsky began talking of Levin, describing hisstrange view that machinery is simply pernicious in its effects onRussian agriculture.
"I have not the pleasure of knowing this M. Levin," Vronsky said,smiling, "but most likely he has never seen the machines he condemns; orif he has seen and tried any, it must have been after a queer fashion,some Russian imitation, not a machine from abroad. What sort of viewscan anyone have on such a subject?"
"Turkish views, in general," Veslovsky said, turning to Anna with asmile.
"I can’t defend his opinions," Darya Alexandrovna said, firing up; "butI can say that he’s a highly cultivated man, and if he were here hewould know very well how to answer you, though I am not capable of doingso."
"I like him extremely, and we are great friends," Sviazhsky said,smiling good-naturedly. "_Mais pardon, il est un petit peu toqué;_ hemaintains, for instance, that district councils and arbitration boardsare all of no use, and he is unwilling to take part in anything."
"It’s our Russian apathy," said Vronsky, pouring water from an iceddecanter into a delicate glass on a high stem; "we’ve no sense of theduties our privileges impose upon us, and so we refuse to recognizethese duties."
"I know no man more strict in the performance of his duties," said DaryaAlexandrovna, irritated by Vronsky’s tone of superiority.
"For my part," pursued Vronsky, who was evidently for some reason orother keenly affected by this conversation, "such as I am, I am, on thecontrary, extremely grateful for the honor they have done me, thanks toNikolay Ivanitch" (he indicated Sviazhsky), "in electing me a justice ofthe peace. I consider that for me the duty of being present at thesession, of judging some peasants’ quarrel about a horse, is asimportant as anything I can do. And I shall regard it as an honor ifthey elect me for the district council. It’s only in that way I can payfor the advantages I enjoy as a landowner. Unluckily they don’tunderstand the weight that the big landowners ought to have in thestate."
It was strange to Darya Alexandrovna to hear how serenely confident hewas of being right at his own table. She thought how Levin, who believedthe opposite, was just as positive in his opinions at his own table. Butshe loved Levin, and so she was on his side.
"So we can reckon upon you, count, for the coming elections?" saidSviazhsky. "But you must come a little beforehand, so as to be on thespot by the eighth. If you would do me the honor to stop with me."
"I rather agree with your beau-frère," said Anna, "though not quite onthe same ground as he," she added with a smile. "I’m afraid that we havetoo many of these public duties in these latter days. Just as in olddays there were so many government functionaries that one had to call ina functionary for every single thing, so now everyone’s doing some sortof public duty. Alexey has been here now six months, and he’s a member,I do believe, of five or six different public bodies. _Du train que celava,_ the whole time will be wasted on it. And I’m afraid that with sucha multiplicity of these bodies, they’ll end in being a mere form. Howmany are you a member of, Nikolay Ivanitch?" she turned toSviazhsky—"over twenty, I fancy."
Anna spoke lightly, but irritation could be discerned in her tone. DaryaAlexandrovna, watching Anna and Vronsky attentively, detected itinstantly. She noticed, too, that as she spoke Vronsky’s face hadimmediately taken a serious and obstinate expression. Noticing this, andthat Princess Varvara at once made haste to change the conversation bytalking of Petersburg acquaintances, and remembering what Vronsky hadwithout apparent connection said in the garden of his work in thecountry, Dolly surmised that this question of public activity wasconnected with some deep private disagreement between Anna and Vronsky.
The dinner, the wine, the decoration of the table were all very good;but it was all like what Darya Alexandrovna had seen at formal dinnersand balls which of late years had become quite unfamiliar to her; it allhad the same impersonal and constrained character, and so on an ordinaryday and in a little circle of friends it made a disagreeable impressionon her.
After dinner they sat on the terrace, then they proceeded to play lawntennis. The players, divided into two parties, stood on opposite sidesof a tightly drawn net with gilt poles on the carefully leveled androlled croquet-ground. Darya Alexandrovna made an attempt to play, butit was a long time before she could understand the game, and by the timeshe did understand it, she was so tired that she sat down with PrincessVarvara and simply looked on at the players. Her partner, Tushkevitch,gave up playing too, but the others kept the game up for a long time.Sviazhsky and Vronsky both played very well and seriously. They kept asharp lookout on the balls served to them, and without haste or gettingin each other’s way, they ran adroitly up to them, waited for therebound, and neatly and accurately returned them over the net. Veslovskyplayed worse than the others. He was too eager, but he kept the playerslively with his high spirits. His laughter and outcries never paused.Like the other men of the party, with the ladies’ permission, he tookoff his coat, and his solid, comely figure in his white shirt-sleeves,with his red perspiring face and his impulsive movements, made a picturethat imprinted itself vividly on the memory.
When Darya Alexandrovna lay in bed that night, as soon as she closed hereyes, she saw Vassenka Veslovsky flying about the croquet ground.
During the game Darya Alexandrovna was not enjoying herself. She did notlike the light tone of raillery that was kept up all the time betweenVassenka Veslovsky and Anna, and the unnaturalness altogether ofgrown-up people, all alone without children, playing at a child’s game.But to avoid breaking up the party and to get through the time somehow,after a rest she joined the game again, and pretended to be enjoying it.All that day it seemed to her as though she were acting in a theaterwith actors cleverer than she, and that her bad acting was spoiling thewhole performance. She had come with the intention of staying two days,if all went well. But in the evening, during the game, she made up hermind that she would go home next day. The maternal cares and worries,which she had so hated on the way, now, after a day spent without them,struck her in quite another light, and tempted her back to them.
When, after evening tea and a row by night in the boat, DaryaAlexandrovna went alone to her room, took off her dress, and beganarranging her thin hair for the night, she had a great sense of relief.
It was positively disagreeable to her to think that Anna was coming tosee her immediately. She longed to be alone with her own thoughts.


Chapter 23

Dolly was wanting to go to bed when Anna came in to see her, attired forthe night. In the course of the day Anna had several times begun tospeak of matters near her heart, and every time after a few words shehad stopped: "Afterwards, by ourselves, we’ll talk about everything.I’ve got so much I want to tell you," she said.
Now they were by themselves, and Anna did not know what to talk about.She sat in the window looking at Dolly, and going over in her own mindall the stores of intimate talk which had seemed so inexhaustiblebeforehand, and she found nothing. At that moment it seemed to her thateverything had been said already.
"Well, what of Kitty?" she said with a heavy sigh, looking penitently atDolly. "Tell me the truth, Dolly: isn’t she angry with me?"
"Angry? Oh, no!" said Darya Alexandrovna, smiling.
"But she hates me, despises me?"
"Oh, no! But you know that sort of thing isn’t forgiven."
"Yes, yes," said Anna, turning away and looking out of the open window."But I was not to blame. And who is to blame? What’s the meaning ofbeing to blame? Could it have been otherwise? What do you think? Couldit possibly have happened that you didn’t become the wife of Stiva?"
"Really, I don’t know. But this is what I want you to tell me..."
"Yes, yes, but we’ve not finished about Kitty. Is she happy? He’s a verynice man, they say."
"He’s much more than very nice. I don’t know a better man."
"Ah, how glad I am! I’m so glad! Much more than very nice," sherepeated.
Dolly smiled.
"But tell me about yourself. We’ve a great deal to talk about. And I’vehad a talk with..." Dolly did not know what to call him. She felt itawkward to call him either the count or Alexey Kirillovitch.
"With Alexey," said Anna, "I know what you talked about. But I wanted toask you directly what you think of me, of my life?"
"How am I to say like that straight off? I really don’t know."
"No, tell me all the same.... You see my life. But you mustn’t forgetthat you’re seeing us in the summer, when you have come to us and we arenot alone.... But we came here early in the spring, lived quite alone,and shall be alone again, and I desire nothing better. But imagine meliving alone without him, alone, and that will be ... I see byeverything that it will often be repeated, that he will be half the timeaway from home," she said, getting up and sitting down close by Dolly.
"Of course," she interrupted Dolly, who would have answered, "of courseI won’t try to keep him by force. I don’t keep him indeed. The races arejust coming, his horses are running, he will go. I’m very glad. Butthink of me, fancy my position.... But what’s the use of talking aboutit?" She smiled. "Well, what did he talk about with you?"
"He spoke of what I want to speak about of myself, and it’s easy for meto be his advocate; of whether there is not a possibility ... whetheryou could not..." (Darya Alexandrovna hesitated) "correct, improve yourposition.... You know how I look at it.... But all the same, ifpossible, you should get married...."
"Divorce, you mean?" said Anna. "Do you know, the only woman who came tosee me in Petersburg was Betsy Tverskaya? You know her, of course? _Aufond, c’est la femme la plus depraveé qui existe._ She had an intriguewith Tushkevitch, deceiving her husband in the basest way. And she toldme that she did not care to know me so long as my position wasirregular. Don’t imagine I would compare ... I know you, darling. But Icould not help remembering.... Well, so what did he say to you?" sherepeated.
"He said that he was unhappy on your account and his own. Perhaps youwill say that it’s egoism, but what a legitimate and noble egoism. Hewants first of all to legitimize his daughter, and to be your husband,to have a legal right to you."
"What wife, what slave can be so utterly a slave as I, in my position?"she put in gloomily.
"The chief thing he desires ... he desires that you should not suffer."
"That’s impossible. Well?"
"Well, and the most legitimate desire—he wishes that your childrenshould have a name."
"What children?" Anna said, not looking at Dolly, and half closing hereyes.
"Annie and those to come..."
"He need not trouble on that score; I shall have no more children."
"How can you tell that you won’t?"
"I shall not, because I don’t wish it." And, in spite of all heremotion, Anna smiled, as she caught the naïve expression of curiosity,wonder, and horror on Dolly’s face.
"The doctor told me after my illness..."
"Impossible!" said Dolly, opening her eyes wide.
For her this was one of those discoveries the consequences anddeductions from which are so immense that all that one feels for thefirst instant is that it is impossible to take it all in, and that onewill have to reflect a great, great deal upon it.
This discovery, suddenly throwing light on all those families of one ortwo children, which had hitherto been so incomprehensible to her,aroused so many ideas, reflections, and contradictory emotions, that shehad nothing to say, and simply gazed with wide-open eyes of wonder atAnna. This was the very thing she had been dreaming of, but now learningthat it was possible, she was horrified. She felt that it was too simplea solution of too complicated a problem.
_"N’est-ce pas immoral?"_ was all she said, after a brief pause.
"Why so? Think, I have a choice between two alternatives: either to bewith child, that is an invalid, or to be the friend and companion of myhusband—practically my husband," Anna said in a tone intentionallysuperficial and frivolous.
"Yes, yes," said Darya Alexandrovna, hearing the very arguments she hadused to herself, and not finding the same force in them as before.
"For you, for other people," said Anna, as though divining her thoughts,"there may be reason to hesitate; but for me.... You must consider, I amnot his wife; he loves me as long as he loves me. And how am I to keephis love? Not like this!"
She moved her white hands in a curve before her waist with extraordinaryrapidity, as happens during moments of excitement; ideas and memoriesrushed into Darya Alexandrovna’s head. "I," she thought, "did not keepmy attraction for Stiva; he left me for others, and the first woman forwhom he betrayed me did not keep him by being always pretty and lively.He deserted her and took another. And can Anna attract and keep CountVronsky in that way? If that is what he looks for, he will find dressesand manners still more attractive and charming. And however white andbeautiful her bare arms are, however beautiful her full figure and hereager face under her black curls, he will find something better still,just as my disgusting, pitiful, and charming husband does."
Dolly made no answer, she merely sighed. Anna noticed this sigh,indicating dissent, and she went on. In her armory she had otherarguments so strong that no answer could be made to them.
"Do you say that it’s not right? But you must consider," she went on;"you forget my position. How can I desire children? I’m not speaking ofthe suffering, I’m not afraid of that. Think only, what are my childrento be? Ill-fated children, who will have to bear a stranger’s name. Forthe very fact of their birth they will be forced to be ashamed of theirmother, their father, their birth."
"But that is just why a divorce is necessary." But Anna did not hearher. She longed to give utterance to all the arguments with which shehad so many times convinced herself.
"What is reason given me for, if I am not to use it to avoid bringingunhappy beings into the world!" She looked at Dolly, but without waitingfor a reply she went on:
"I should always feel I had wronged these unhappy children," she said."If they are not, at any rate they are not unhappy; while if they areunhappy, I alone should be to blame for it."
These were the very arguments Darya Alexandrovna had used in her ownreflections; but she heard them without understanding them. "How can onewrong creatures that don’t exist?" she thought. And all at once the ideastruck her: could it possibly, under any circumstances, have been betterfor her favorite Grisha if he had never existed? And this seemed to herso wild, so strange, that she shook her head to drive away this tangleof whirling, mad ideas.
"No, I don’t know; it’s not right," was all she said, with an expressionof disgust on her face.
"Yes, but you mustn’t forget that you and I.... And besides that," addedAnna, in spite of the wealth of her arguments and the poverty of Dolly’sobjections, seeming still to admit that it was not right, "don’t forgetthe chief point, that I am not now in the same position as you. For youthe question is: do you desire not to have any more children; while forme it is: do I desire to have them? And that’s a great difference. Youmust see that I can’t desire it in my position."
Darya Alexandrovna made no reply. She suddenly felt that she had got faraway from Anna; that there lay between them a barrier of questions onwhich they could never agree, and about which it was better not tospeak.


Chapter 24

"Then there is all the more reason for you to legalize your position, ifpossible," said Dolly.
"Yes, if possible," said Anna, speaking all at once in an utterlydifferent tone, subdued and mournful.
"Surely you don’t mean a divorce is impossible? I was told your husbandhad consented to it."
"Dolly, I don’t want to talk about that."
"Oh, we won’t then," Darya Alexandrovna hastened to say, noticing theexpression of suffering on Anna’s face. "All I see is that you take toogloomy a view of things."
"I? Not at all! I’m always bright and happy. You see, _je fais despassions._ Veslovsky..."
"Yes, to tell the truth, I don’t like Veslovsky’s tone," said DaryaAlexandrovna, anxious to change the subject.
"Oh, that’s nonsense! It amuses Alexey, and that’s all; but he’s a boy,and quite under my control. You know, I turn him as I please. It’s justas it might be with your Grisha.... Dolly!"—she suddenly changed thesubject—"you say I take too gloomy a view of things. You can’tunderstand. It’s too awful! I try not to take any view of it at all."
"But I think you ought to. You ought to do all you can."
"But what can I do? Nothing. You tell me to marry Alexey, and say Idon’t think about it. I don’t think about it!" she repeated, and a flushrose into her face. She got up, straightening her chest, and sighedheavily. With her light step she began pacing up and down the room,stopping now and then. "I don’t think of it? Not a day, not an hourpasses that I don’t think of it, and blame myself for thinking of it ...because thinking of that may drive me mad. Drive me mad!" she repeated."When I think of it, I can’t sleep without morphine. But never mind. Letus talk quietly. They tell me, divorce. In the first place, he won’tgive me a divorce. He’s under the influence of Countess Lidia Ivanovnanow."
Darya Alexandrovna, sitting erect on a chair, turned her head, followingAnna with a face of sympathetic suffering.
"You ought to make the attempt," she said softly.
"Suppose I make the attempt. What does it mean?" she said, evidentlygiving utterance to a thought, a thousand times thought over and learnedby heart. "It means that I, hating him, but still recognizing that Ihave wronged him—and I consider him magnanimous—that I humiliate myselfto write to him.... Well, suppose I make the effort; I do it. Either Ireceive a humiliating refusal or consent.... Well, I have received hisconsent, say..." Anna was at that moment at the furthest end of theroom, and she stopped there, doing something to the curtain at thewindow. "I receive his consent, but my ... my son? They won’t give himup to me. He will grow up despising me, with his father, whom I’veabandoned. Do you see, I love ... equally, I think, but both more thanmyself—two creatures, Seryozha and Alexey."
She came out into the middle of the room and stood facing Dolly, withher arms pressed tightly across her chest. In her white dressing gownher figure seemed more than usually grand and broad. She bent her head,and with shining, wet eyes looked from under her brows at Dolly, a thinlittle pitiful figure in her patched dressing jacket and nightcap,shaking all over with emotion.
"It is only those two creatures that I love, and one excludes the other.I can’t have them together, and that’s the only thing I want. And sinceI can’t have that, I don’t care about the rest. I don’t care aboutanything, anything. And it will end one way or another, and so I can’t,I don’t like to talk of it. So don’t blame me, don’t judge me foranything. You can’t with your pure heart understand all that I’msuffering." She went up, sat down beside Dolly, and with a guilty look,peeped into her face and took her hand.
"What are you thinking? What are you thinking about me? Don’t despiseme. I don’t deserve contempt. I’m simply unhappy. If anyone is unhappy,I am," she articulated, and turning away, she burst into tears.
Left alone, Darya Alexandrovna said her prayers and went to bed. She hadfelt for Anna with all her heart while she was speaking to her, but nowshe could not force herself to think of her. The memories of home and ofher children rose up in her imagination with a peculiar charm quite newto her, with a sort of new brilliance. That world of her own seemed toher now so sweet and precious that she would not on any account spend anextra day outside it, and she made up her mind that she would certainlygo back next day.
Anna meantime went back to her boudoir, took a wine glass and droppedinto it several drops of a medicine, of which the principal ingredientwas morphine. After drinking it off and sitting still a little while,she went into her bedroom in a soothed and more cheerful frame of mind.
When she went into the bedroom, Vronsky looked intently at her. He waslooking for traces of the conversation which he knew that, staying solong in Dolly’s room, she must have had with her. But in her expressionof restrained excitement, and of a sort of reserve, he could findnothing but the beauty that always bewitched him afresh though he wasused to it, the consciousness of it, and the desire that it shouldaffect him. He did not want to ask her what they had been talking of,but he hoped that she would tell him something of her own accord. Butshe only said:
"I am so glad you like Dolly. You do, don’t you?"
"Oh, I’ve known her a long while, you know. She’s very good-hearted, Isuppose, _mais excessivement terre-à-terre._ Still, I’m very glad to seeher."
He took Anna’s hand and looked inquiringly into her eyes.
Misinterpreting the look, she smiled to him. Next morning, in spite ofthe protests of her hosts, Darya Alexandrovna prepared for her homewardjourney. Levin’s coachman, in his by no means new coat and shabby hat,with his ill-matched horses and his coach with the patched mud-guards,drove with gloomy determination into the covered gravel approach.
Darya Alexandrovna disliked taking leave of Princess Varvara and thegentlemen of the party. After a day spent together, both she and herhosts were distinctly aware that they did not get on together, and thatit was better for them not to meet. Only Anna was sad. She knew thatnow, from Dolly’s departure, no one again would stir up within her soulthe feelings that had been roused by their conversation. It hurt her tostir up these feelings, but yet she knew that that was the best part ofher soul, and that that part of her soul would quickly be smothered inthe life she was leading.
As she drove out into the open country, Darya Alexandrovna had adelightful sense of relief, and she felt tempted to ask the two men howthey had liked being at Vronsky’s, when suddenly the coachman, Philip,expressed himself unasked:
"Rolling in wealth they may be, but three pots of oats was all they gaveus. Everything cleared up till there wasn’t a grain left by cockcrow.What are three pots? A mere mouthful! And oats now down to forty-fivekopecks. At our place, no fear, all comers may have as much as they caneat."
"The master’s a screw," put in the counting house clerk.
"Well, did you like their horses?" asked Dolly.
"The horses!—there’s no two opinions about them. And the food was good.But it seemed to me sort of dreary there, Darya Alexandrovna. I don’tknow what you thought," he said, turning his handsome, good-natured faceto her.
"I thought so too. Well, shall we get home by evening?"
"Eh, we must!"
On reaching home and finding everyone entirely satisfactory andparticularly charming, Darya Alexandrovna began with great livelinesstelling them how she had arrived, how warmly they had received her, ofthe luxury and good taste in which the Vronskys lived, and of theirrecreations, and she would not allow a word to be said against them.
"One has to know Anna and Vronsky—I have got to know him better now—tosee how nice they are, and how touching," she said, speaking now withperfect sincerity, and forgetting the vague feeling of dissatisfactionand awkwardness she had experienced there.


Chapter 25

Vronsky and Anna spent the whole summer and part of the winter in thecountry, living in just the same condition, and still taking no steps toobtain a divorce. It was an understood thing between them that theyshould not go away anywhere; but both felt, the longer they lived alone,especially in the autumn, without guests in the house, that they couldnot stand this existence, and that they would have to alter it.
Their life was apparently such that nothing better could be desired.They had the fullest abundance of everything; they had a child, and bothhad occupation. Anna devoted just as much care to her appearance whenthey had no visitors, and she did a great deal of reading, both ofnovels and of what serious literature was in fashion. She ordered allthe books that were praised in the foreign papers and reviews shereceived, and read them with that concentrated attention which is onlygiven to what is read in seclusion. Moreover, every subject that was ofinterest to Vronsky, she studied in books and special journals, so thathe often went straight to her with questions relating to agriculture orarchitecture, sometimes even with questions relating to horse-breedingor sport. He was amazed at her knowledge, her memory, and at first wasdisposed to doubt it, to ask for confirmation of her facts; and shewould find what he asked for in some book, and show it to him.
The building of the hospital, too, interested her. She did not merelyassist, but planned and suggested a great deal herself. But her chiefthought was still of herself—how far she was dear to Vronsky, how farshe could make up to him for all he had given up. Vronsky appreciatedthis desire not only to please, but to serve him, which had become thesole aim of her existence, but at the same time he wearied of the lovingsnares in which she tried to hold him fast. As time went on, and he sawhimself more and more often held fast in these snares, he had an evergrowing desire, not so much to escape from them, as to try whether theyhindered his freedom. Had it not been for this growing desire to befree, not to have scenes every time he wanted to go to the town to ameeting or a race, Vronsky would have been perfectly satisfied with hislife. The rôle he had taken up, the rôle of a wealthy landowner, one ofthat class which ought to be the very heart of the Russian aristocracy,was entirely to his taste; and now, after spending six months in thatcharacter, he derived even greater satisfaction from it. And hismanagement of his estate, which occupied and absorbed him more and more,was most successful. In spite of the immense sums cost him by thehospital, by machinery, by cows ordered from Switzerland, and many otherthings, he was convinced that he was not wasting, but increasing hissubstance. In all matters affecting income, the sales of timber, wheat,and wool, the letting of lands, Vronsky was hard as a rock, and knewwell how to keep up prices. In all operations on a large scale on thisand his other estates, he kept to the simplest methods involving norisk, and in trifling details he was careful and exacting to an extremedegree. In spite of all the cunning and ingenuity of the German steward,who would try to tempt him into purchases by making his originalestimate always far larger than really required, and then representingto Vronsky that he might get the thing cheaper, and so make a profit,Vronsky did not give in. He listened to his steward, cross-examined him,and only agreed to his suggestions when the implement to be ordered orconstructed was the very newest, not yet known in Russia, and likely toexcite wonder. Apart from such exceptions, he resolved upon an increasedoutlay only where there was a surplus, and in making such an outlay hewent into the minutest details, and insisted on getting the very bestfor his money; so that by the method on which he managed his affairs, itwas clear that he was not wasting, but increasing his substance.
In October there were the provincial elections in the Kashinskyprovince, where were the estates of Vronsky, Sviazhsky, Koznishev,Oblonsky, and a small part of Levin’s land.
These elections were attracting public attention from severalcircumstances connected with them, and also from the people taking partin them. There had been a great deal of talk about them, and greatpreparations were being made for them. Persons who never attended theelections were coming from Moscow, from Petersburg, and from abroad toattend these. Vronsky had long before promised Sviazhsky to go to them.Before the elections Sviazhsky, who often visited Vozdvizhenskoe, droveover to fetch Vronsky. On the day before there had been almost a quarrelbetween Vronsky and Anna over this proposed expedition. It was the verydullest autumn weather, which is so dreary in the country, and so,preparing himself for a struggle, Vronsky, with a hard and coldexpression, informed Anna of his departure as he had never spoken to herbefore. But, to his surprise, Anna accepted the information with greatcomposure, and merely asked when he would be back. He looked intently ather, at a loss to explain this composure. She smiled at his look. Heknew that way she had of withdrawing into herself, and knew that it onlyhappened when she had determined upon something without letting him knowher plans. He was afraid of this; but he was so anxious to avoid a scenethat he kept up appearances, and half sincerely believed in what helonged to believe in—her reasonableness.
"I hope you won’t be dull?"
"I hope not," said Anna. "I got a box of books yesterday from Gautier’s.No, I shan’t be dull."
"She’s trying to take that tone, and so much the better," he thought,"or else it would be the same thing over and over again."
And he set off for the elections without appealing to her for a candidexplanation. It was the first time since the beginning of their intimacythat he had parted from her without a full explanation. From one pointof view this troubled him, but on the other side he felt that it wasbetter so. "At first there will be, as this time, something undefinedkept back, and then she will get used to it. In any case I can give upanything for her, but not my masculine independence," he thought.


Chapter 26

In September Levin moved to Moscow for Kitty’s confinement. He had spenta whole month in Moscow with nothing to do, when Sergey Ivanovitch, whohad property in the Kashinsky province, and took great interest in thequestion of the approaching elections, made ready to set off to theelections. He invited his brother, who had a vote in the Seleznevskydistrict, to come with him. Levin had, moreover, to transact in Kashinsome extremely important business relating to the wardship of land andto the receiving of certain redemption money for his sister, who wasabroad.
Levin still hesitated, but Kitty, who saw that he was bored in Moscow,and urged him to go, on her own authority ordered him the propernobleman’s uniform, costing seven pounds. And that seven pounds paid forthe uniform was the chief cause that finally decided Levin to go. Hewent to Kashin....
Levin had been six days in Kashin, visiting the assembly each day, andbusily engaged about his sister’s business, which still dragged on. Thedistrict marshals of nobility were all occupied with the elections, andit was impossible to get the simplest thing done that depended upon thecourt of wardship. The other matter, the payment of the sums due, wasmet too by difficulties. After long negotiations over the legal details,the money was at last ready to be paid; but the notary, a most obligingperson, could not hand over the order, because it must have thesignature of the president, and the president, though he had not givenover his duties to a deputy, was at the elections. All these worryingnegotiations, this endless going from place to place, and talking withpleasant and excellent people, who quite saw the unpleasantness of thepetitioner’s position, but were powerless to assist him—all theseefforts that yielded no result, led to a feeling of misery in Levin akinto the mortifying helplessness one experiences in dreams when one triesto use physical force. He felt this frequently as he talked to his mostgood-natured solicitor. This solicitor did, it seemed, everythingpossible, and strained every nerve to get him out of his difficulties."I tell you what you might try," he said more than once; "go toso-and-so and so-and-so," and the solicitor drew up a regular plan forgetting round the fatal point that hindered everything. But he would addimmediately, "It’ll mean some delay, anyway, but you might try it." AndLevin did try, and did go. Everyone was kind and civil, but the pointevaded seemed to crop up again in the end, and again to bar the way.What was particularly trying, was that Levin could not make out withwhom he was struggling, to whose interest it was that his businessshould not be done. That no one seemed to know; the solicitor certainlydid not know. If Levin could have understood why, just as he saw why onecan only approach the booking office of a railway station in singlefile, it would not have been so vexatious and tiresome to him. But withthe hindrances that confronted him in his business, no one could explainwhy they existed.
But Levin had changed a good deal since his marriage; he was patient,and if he could not see why it was all arranged like this, he toldhimself that he could not judge without knowing all about it, and thatmost likely it must be so, and he tried not to fret.
In attending the elections, too, and taking part in them, he tried nownot to judge, not to fall foul of them, but to comprehend as fully as hecould the question which was so earnestly and ardently absorbing honestand excellent men whom he respected. Since his marriage there had beenrevealed to Levin so many new and serious aspects of life that hadpreviously, through his frivolous attitude to them, seemed of noimportance, that in the question of the elections too he assumed andtried to find some serious significance.
Sergey Ivanovitch explained to him the meaning and object of theproposed revolution at the elections. The marshal of the province inwhose hands the law had placed the control of so many important publicfunctions—the guardianship of wards (the very department which wasgiving Levin so much trouble just now), the disposal of large sumssubscribed by the nobility of the province, the high schools, female,male, and military, and popular instruction on the new model, andfinally, the district council—the marshal of the province, Snetkov, wasa nobleman of the old school,—dissipating an immense fortune, agood-hearted man, honest after his own fashion, but utterly without anycomprehension of the needs of modern days. He always took, in everyquestion, the side of the nobility; he was positively antagonistic tothe spread of popular education, and he succeeded in giving a purelyparty character to the district council which ought by rights to be ofsuch an immense importance. What was needed was to put in his place afresh, capable, perfectly modern man, of contemporary ideas, and toframe their policy so as from the rights conferred upon the nobles, notas the nobility, but as an element of the district council, to extractall the powers of self-government that could possibly be derived fromthem. In the wealthy Kashinsky province, which always took the lead ofother provinces in everything, there was now such a preponderance offorces that this policy, once carried through properly there, mightserve as a model for other provinces for all Russia. And hence the wholequestion was of the greatest importance. It was proposed to elect asmarshal in place of Snetkov either Sviazhsky, or, better still,Nevyedovsky, a former university professor, a man of remarkableintelligence and a great friend of Sergey Ivanovitch.
The meeting was opened by the governor, who made a speech to the nobles,urging them to elect the public functionaries, not from regard forpersons, but for the service and welfare of their fatherland, and hopingthat the honorable nobility of the Kashinsky province would, as at allformer elections, hold their duty as sacred, and vindicate the exaltedconfidence of the monarch.
When he had finished with his speech, the governor walked out of thehall, and the noblemen noisily and eagerly—some evenenthusiastically—followed him and thronged round him while he put on hisfur coat and conversed amicably with the marshal of the province. Levin,anxious to see into everything and not to miss anything, stood there tooin the crowd, and heard the governor say: "Please tell Marya Ivanovna mywife is very sorry she couldn’t come to the Home." And thereupon thenobles in high good-humor sorted out their fur coats and all drove offto the cathedral.
In the cathedral Levin, lifting his hand like the rest and repeating thewords of the archdeacon, swore with most terrible oaths to do all thegovernor had hoped they would do. Church services always affected Levin,and as he uttered the words "I kiss the cross," and glanced round at thecrowd of young and old men repeating the same, he felt touched.
On the second and third days there was business relating to the financesof the nobility and the female high school, of no importance whatever,as Sergey Ivanovitch explained, and Levin, busy seeing after his ownaffairs, did not attend the meetings. On the fourth day the auditing ofthe marshal’s accounts took place at the high table of the marshal ofthe province. And then there occurred the first skirmish between the newparty and the old. The committee who had been deputed to verify theaccounts reported to the meeting that all was in order. The marshal ofthe province got up, thanked the nobility for their confidence, and shedtears. The nobles gave him a loud welcome, and shook hands with him. Butat that instant a nobleman of Sergey Ivanovitch’s party said that he hadheard that the committee had not verified the accounts, considering sucha verification an insult to the marshal of the province. One of themembers of the committee incautiously admitted this. Then a smallgentleman, very young-looking but very malignant, began to say that itwould probably be agreeable to the marshal of the province to give anaccount of his expenditures of the public moneys, and that the misplaceddelicacy of the members of the committee was depriving him of this moralsatisfaction. Then the members of the committee tried to withdraw theiradmission, and Sergey Ivanovitch began to prove that they must logicallyadmit either that they had verified the accounts or that they had not,and he developed this dilemma in detail. Sergey Ivanovitch was answeredby the spokesman of the opposite party. Then Sviazhsky spoke, and thenthe malignant gentleman again. The discussion lasted a long time andended in nothing. Levin was surprised that they should dispute upon thissubject so long, especially as, when he asked Sergey Ivanovitch whetherhe supposed that money had been misappropriated, Sergey Ivanovitchanswered:
"Oh, no! He’s an honest man. But those old-fashioned methods of paternalfamily arrangements in the management of provincial affairs must bebroken down."
On the fifth day came the elections of the district marshals. It wasrather a stormy day in several districts. In the Seleznevsky districtSviazhsky was elected unanimously without a ballot, and he gave a dinnerthat evening.


Chapter 27

The sixth day was fixed for the election of the marshal of the province.
The rooms, large and small, were full of noblemen in all sorts ofuniforms. Many had come only for that day. Men who had not seen eachother for years, some from the Crimea, some from Petersburg, some fromabroad, met in the rooms of the Hall of Nobility. There was muchdiscussion around the governor’s table under the portrait of the Tsar.
The nobles, both in the larger and the smaller rooms, grouped themselvesin camps, and from their hostile and suspicious glances, from thesilence that fell upon them when outsiders approached a group, and fromthe way that some, whispering together, retreated to the farthercorridor, it was evident that each side had secrets from the other. Inappearance the noblemen were sharply divided into two classes: the oldand the new. The old were for the most part either in old uniforms ofthe nobility, buttoned up closely, with spurs and hats, or in their ownspecial naval, cavalry, infantry, or official uniforms. The uniforms ofthe older men were embroidered in the old-fashioned way with epaulets ontheir shoulders; they were unmistakably tight and short in the waist, asthough their wearers had grown out of them. The younger men wore theuniform of the nobility with long waists and broad shoulders, unbuttonedover white waistcoats, or uniforms with black collars and with theembroidered badges of justices of the peace. To the younger men belongedthe court uniforms that here and there brightened up the crowd.
But the division into young and old did not correspond with the divisionof parties. Some of the young men, as Levin observed, belonged to theold party; and some of the very oldest noblemen, on the contrary, werewhispering with Sviazhsky, and were evidently ardent partisans of thenew party.
Levin stood in the smaller room, where they were smoking and takinglight refreshments, close to his own friends, and listening to what theywere saying, he conscientiously exerted all his intelligence trying tounderstand what was said. Sergey Ivanovitch was the center round whichthe others grouped themselves. He was listening at that moment toSviazhsky and Hliustov, the marshal of another district, who belonged totheir party. Hliustov would not agree to go with his district to askSnetkov to stand, while Sviazhsky was persuading him to do so, andSergey Ivanovitch was approving of the plan. Levin could not make outwhy the opposition was to ask the marshal to stand whom they wanted tosupersede.
Stepan Arkadyevitch, who had just been drinking and taking some lunch,came up to them in his uniform of a gentleman of the bedchamber, wipinghis lips with a perfumed handkerchief of bordered batiste.
"We are placing our forces," he said, pulling out his whiskers, "SergeyIvanovitch!"
And listening to the conversation, he supported Sviazhsky’s contention.
"One district’s enough, and Sviazhsky’s obviously of the opposition," hesaid, words evidently intelligible to all except Levin.
"Why, Kostya, you here too! I suppose you’re converted, eh?" he added,turning to Levin and drawing his arm through his. Levin would have beenglad indeed to be converted, but could not make out what the point was,and retreating a few steps from the speakers, he explained to StepanArkadyevitch his inability to understand why the marshal of the provinceshould be asked to stand.
_"O sancta simplicitas!"_ said Stepan Arkadyevitch, and briefly andclearly he explained it to Levin. If, as at previous elections, all thedistricts asked the marshal of the province to stand, then he would beelected without a ballot. That must not be. Now eight districts hadagreed to call upon him: if two refused to do so, Snetkov might declineto stand at all; and then the old party might choose another of theirparty, which would throw them completely out in their reckoning. But ifonly one district, Sviazhsky’s, did not call upon him to stand, Snetkovwould let himself be balloted for. They were even, some of them, goingto vote for him, and purposely to let him get a good many votes, so thatthe enemy might be thrown off the scent, and when a candidate of theother side was put up, they too might give him some votes. Levinunderstood to some extent, but not fully, and would have put a few morequestions, when suddenly everyone began talking and making a noise andthey moved towards the big room.
"What is it? eh? whom?" "No guarantee? whose? what?" "They won’t passhim?" "No guarantee?" "They won’t let Flerov in?" "Eh, because of thecharge against him?" "Why, at this rate, they won’t admit anyone. It’s aswindle!" "The law!" Levin heard exclamations on all sides, and he movedinto the big room together with the others, all hurrying somewhere andafraid of missing something. Squeezed by the crowding noblemen, he drewnear the high table where the marshal of the province, Sviazhsky, andthe other leaders were hotly disputing about something.


Chapter 28

Levin was standing rather far off. A nobleman breathing heavily andhoarsely at his side, and another whose thick boots were creaking,prevented him from hearing distinctly. He could only hear the soft voiceof the marshal faintly, then the shrill voice of the malignantgentleman, and then the voice of Sviazhsky. They were disputing, as faras he could make out, as to the interpretation to be put on the act andthe exact meaning of the words: "liable to be called up for trial."
The crowd parted to make way for Sergey Ivanovitch approaching thetable. Sergey Ivanovitch, waiting till the malignant gentleman hadfinished speaking, said that he thought the best solution would be torefer to the act itself, and asked the secretary to find the act. Theact said that in case of difference of opinion, there must be a ballot.
Sergey Ivanovitch read the act and began to explain its meaning, but atthat point a tall, stout, round-shouldered landowner, with dyedwhiskers, in a tight uniform that cut the back of his neck, interruptedhim. He went up to the table, and striking it with his finger ring, heshouted loudly: "A ballot! Put it to the vote! No need for moretalking!" Then several voices began to talk all at once, and the tallnobleman with the ring, getting more and more exasperated, shouted moreand more loudly. But it was impossible to make out what he said.
He was shouting for the very course Sergey Ivanovitch had proposed; butit was evident that he hated him and all his party, and this feeling ofhatred spread through the whole party and roused in opposition to it thesame vindictiveness, though in a more seemly form, on the other side.Shouts were raised, and for a moment all was confusion, so that themarshal of the province had to call for order.
"A ballot! A ballot! Every nobleman sees it! We shed our blood for ourcountry!... The confidence of the monarch.... No checking the accountsof the marshal; he’s not a cashier.... But that’s not the point....Votes, please! Beastly!..." shouted furious and violent voices on allsides. Looks and faces were even more violent and furious than theirwords. They expressed the most implacable hatred. Levin did not in theleast understand what was the matter, and he marveled at the passionwith which it was disputed whether or not the decision about Flerovshould be put to the vote. He forgot, as Sergey Ivanovitch explained tohim afterwards, this syllogism: that it was necessary for the publicgood to get rid of the marshal of the province; that to get rid of themarshal it was necessary to have a majority of votes; that to get amajority of votes it was necessary to secure Flerov’s right to vote;that to secure the recognition of Flerov’s right to vote they mustdecide on the interpretation to be put on the act.
"And one vote may decide the whole question, and one must be serious andconsecutive, if one wants to be of use in public life," concluded SergeyIvanovitch. But Levin forgot all that, and it was painful to him to seeall these excellent persons, for whom he had a respect, in such anunpleasant and vicious state of excitement. To escape from this painfulfeeling he went away into the other room where there was nobody exceptthe waiters at the refreshment bar. Seeing the waiters busy over washingup the crockery and setting in order their plates and wine glasses,seeing their calm and cheerful faces, Levin felt an unexpected sense ofrelief as though he had come out of a stuffy room into the fresh air. Hebegan walking up and down, looking with pleasure at the waiters. Heparticularly liked the way one gray-whiskered waiter, who showed hisscorn for the other younger ones and was jeered at by them, was teachingthem how to fold up napkins properly. Levin was just about to enter intoconversation with the old waiter, when the secretary of the court ofwardship, a little old man whose specialty it was to know all thenoblemen of the province by name and patronymic, drew him away.
"Please come, Konstantin Dmitrievitch," he said, "your brother’s lookingfor you. They are voting on the legal point."
Levin walked into the room, received a white ball, and followed hisbrother, Sergey Ivanovitch, to the table where Sviazhsky was standingwith a significant and ironical face, holding his beard in his fist andsniffing at it. Sergey Ivanovitch put his hand into the box, put theball somewhere, and making room for Levin, stopped. Levin advanced, bututterly forgetting what he was to do, and much embarrassed, he turned toSergey Ivanovitch with the question, "Where am I to put it?" He askedthis softly, at a moment when there was talking going on near, so thathe had hoped his question would not be overheard. But the personsspeaking paused, and his improper question was overheard. SergeyIvanovitch frowned.
"That is a matter for each man’s own decision," he said severely.
Several people smiled. Levin crimsoned, hurriedly thrust his hand underthe cloth, and put the ball to the right as it was in his right hand.Having put it in, he recollected that he ought to have thrust his lefthand too, and so he thrust it in though too late, and, still moreovercome with confusion, he beat a hasty retreat into the background.
"A hundred and twenty-six for admission! Ninety-eight against!" sang outthe voice of the secretary, who could not pronounce the letter _r_. Thenthere was a laugh; a button and two nuts were found in the box. Thenobleman was allowed the right to vote, and the new party had conquered.
But the old party did not consider themselves conquered. Levin heardthat they were asking Snetkov to stand, and he saw that a crowd ofnoblemen was surrounding the marshal, who was saying something. Levinwent nearer. In reply Snetkov spoke of the trust the noblemen of theprovince had placed in him, the affection they had shown him, which hedid not deserve, as his only merit had been his attachment to thenobility, to whom he had devoted twelve years of service. Several timeshe repeated the words: "I have served to the best of my powers withtruth and good faith, I value your goodness and thank you," and suddenlyhe stopped short from the tears that choked him, and went out of theroom. Whether these tears came from a sense of the injustice being donehim, from his love for the nobility, or from the strain of the positionhe was placed in, feeling himself surrounded by enemies, his emotioninfected the assembly, the majority were touched, and Levin felt atenderness for Snetkov.
In the doorway the marshal of the province jostled against Levin.
"Beg pardon, excuse me, please," he said as to a stranger, butrecognizing Levin, he smiled timidly. It seemed to Levin that he wouldhave liked to say something, but could not speak for emotion. His faceand his whole figure in his uniform with the crosses, and white trousersstriped with braid, as he moved hurriedly along, reminded Levin of somehunted beast who sees that he is in evil case. This expression in themarshal’s face was particularly touching to Levin, because, only the daybefore, he had been at his house about his trustee business and had seenhim in all his grandeur, a kind-hearted, fatherly man. The big housewith the old family furniture; the rather dirty, far from stylish, butrespectful footmen, unmistakably old house serfs who had stuck to theirmaster; the stout, good-natured wife in a cap with lace and a Turkishshawl, petting her pretty grandchild, her daughter’s daughter; the youngson, a sixth form high school boy, coming home from school, and greetinghis father, kissing his big hand; the genuine, cordial words andgestures of the old man—all this had the day before roused aninstinctive feeling of respect and sympathy in Levin. This old man was atouching and pathetic figure to Levin now, and he longed to saysomething pleasant to him.
"So you’re sure to be our marshal again," he said.
"It’s not likely," said the marshal, looking round with a scaredexpression. "I’m worn out, I’m old. If there are men younger and moredeserving than I, let them serve."
And the marshal disappeared through a side door.
The most solemn moment was at hand. They were to proceed immediately tothe election. The leaders of both parties were reckoning white and blackon their fingers.
The discussion upon Flerov had given the new party not only Flerov’svote, but had also gained time for them, so that they could send tofetch three noblemen who had been rendered unable to take part in theelections by the wiles of the other party. Two noble gentlemen, who hada weakness for strong drink, had been made drunk by the partisans ofSnetkov, and a third had been robbed of his uniform.
On learning this, the new party had made haste, during the dispute aboutFlerov, to send some of their men in a sledge to clothe the strippedgentleman, and to bring along one of the intoxicated to the meeting.
"I’ve brought one, drenched him with water," said the landowner, who hadgone on this errand, to Sviazhsky. "He’s all right? he’ll do."
"Not too drunk, he won’t fall down?" said Sviazhsky, shaking his head.
"No, he’s first-rate. If only they don’t give him any more here.... I’vetold the waiter not to give him anything on any account."


Chapter 29

The narrow room, in which they were smoking and taking refreshments, wasfull of noblemen. The excitement grew more intense, and every facebetrayed some uneasiness. The excitement was specially keen for theleaders of each party, who knew every detail, and had reckoned up everyvote. They were the generals organizing the approaching battle. Therest, like the rank and file before an engagement, though they weregetting ready for the fight, sought for other distractions in theinterval. Some were lunching, standing at the bar, or sitting at thetable; others were walking up and down the long room, smokingcigarettes, and talking with friends whom they had not seen for a longwhile.
Levin did not care to eat, and he was not smoking; he did not want tojoin his own friends, that is Sergey Ivanovitch, Stepan Arkadyevitch,Sviazhsky and the rest, because Vronsky in his equerry’s uniform wasstanding with them in eager conversation. Levin had seen him already atthe meeting on the previous day, and he had studiously avoided him, notcaring to greet him. He went to the window and sat down, scanning thegroups, and listening to what was being said around him. He feltdepressed, especially because everyone else was, as he saw, eager,anxious, and interested, and he alone, with an old, toothless little manwith mumbling lips wearing a naval uniform, sitting beside him, had nointerest in it and nothing to do.
"He’s such a blackguard! I have told him so, but it makes no difference.Only think of it! He couldn’t collect it in three years!" he heardvigorously uttered by a round-shouldered, short, country gentleman, whohad pomaded hair hanging on his embroidered collar, and new bootsobviously put on for the occasion, with heels that tapped energeticallyas he spoke. Casting a displeased glance at Levin, this gentlemansharply turned his back.
"Yes, it’s a dirty business, there’s no denying," a small gentlemanassented in a high voice.
Next, a whole crowd of country gentlemen, surrounding a stout general,hurriedly came near Levin. These persons were unmistakably seeking aplace where they could talk without being overheard.
"How dare he say I had his breeches stolen! Pawned them for drink, Iexpect. Damn the fellow, prince indeed! He’d better not say it, thebeast!"
"But excuse me! They take their stand on the act," was being said inanother group; "the wife must be registered as noble."
"Oh, damn your acts! I speak from my heart. We’re all gentlemen, aren’twe? Above suspicion."
"Shall we go on, your excellency, _fine champagne?_"
Another group was following a nobleman, who was shouting something in aloud voice; it was one of the three intoxicated gentlemen.
"I always advised Marya Semyonovna to let for a fair rent, for she cannever save a profit," he heard a pleasant voice say. The speaker was acountry gentleman with gray whiskers, wearing the regimental uniform ofan old general staff-officer. It was the very landowner Levin had met atSviazhsky’s. He knew him at once. The landowner too stared at Levin, andthey exchanged greetings.
"Very glad to see you! To be sure! I remember you very well. Last yearat our district marshal, Nikolay Ivanovitch’s."
"Well, and how is your land doing?" asked Levin.
"Oh, still just the same, always at a loss," the landowner answered witha resigned smile, but with an expression of serenity and conviction thatso it must be. "And how do you come to be in our province?" he asked."Come to take part in our _coup d’état?_" he said, confidentlypronouncing the French words with a bad accent. "All Russia’shere—gentlemen of the bedchamber, and everything short of the ministry."He pointed to the imposing figure of Stepan Arkadyevitch in whitetrousers and his court uniform, walking by with a general.
"I ought to own that I don’t very well understand the drift of theprovincial elections," said Levin.
The landowner looked at him.
"Why, what is there to understand? There’s no meaning in it at all. It’sa decaying institution that goes on running only by the force ofinertia. Just look, the very uniforms tell you that it’s an assembly ofjustices of the peace, permanent members of the court, and so on, butnot of noblemen."
"Then why do you come?" asked Levin.
"From habit, nothing else. Then, too, one must keep up connections. It’sa moral obligation of a sort. And then, to tell the truth, there’s one’sown interests. My son-in-law wants to stand as a permanent member;they’re not rich people, and he must be brought forward. Thesegentlemen, now, what do they come for?" he said, pointing to themalignant gentleman, who was talking at the high table.
"That’s the new generation of nobility."
"New it may be, but nobility it isn’t. They’re proprietors of a sort,but we’re the landowners. As noblemen, they’re cutting their ownthroats."
"But you say it’s an institution that’s served its time."
"That it may be, but still it ought to be treated a little morerespectfully. Snetkov, now.... We may be of use, or we may not, butwe’re the growth of a thousand years. If we’re laying out a garden,planning one before the house, you know, and there you’ve a tree that’sstood for centuries in the very spot.... Old and gnarled it may be, andyet you don’t cut down the old fellow to make room for the flowerbeds,but lay out your beds so as to take advantage of the tree. You won’tgrow him again in a year," he said cautiously, and he immediatelychanged the conversation. "Well, and how is your land doing?"
"Oh, not very well. I make five per cent."
"Yes, but you don’t reckon your own work. Aren’t you worth somethingtoo? I’ll tell you my own case. Before I took to seeing after the land,I had a salary of three hundred pounds from the service. Now I do morework than I did in the service, and like you I get five per cent. on theland, and thank God for that. But one’s work is thrown in for nothing."
"Then why do you do it, if it’s a clear loss?"
"Oh, well, one does it! What would you have? It’s habit, and one knowsit’s how it should be. And what’s more," the landowner went on, leaninghis elbows on the window and chatting on, "my son, I must tell you, hasno taste for it. There’s no doubt he’ll be a scientific man. So there’llbe no one to keep it up. And yet one does it. Here this year I’veplanted an orchard."
"Yes, yes," said Levin, "that’s perfectly true. I always feel there’s noreal balance of gain in my work on the land, and yet one does it....It’s a sort of duty one feels to the land."
"But I tell you what," the landowner pursued; "a neighbor of mine, amerchant, was at my place. We walked about the fields and the garden.‘No,’ said he, ‘Stepan Vassilievitch, everything’s well looked after,but your garden’s neglected.’ But, as a fact, it’s well kept up. ‘To mythinking, I’d cut down that lime-tree. Here you’ve thousands of limes,and each would make two good bundles of bark. And nowadays that bark’sworth something. I’d cut down the lot.’"
"And with what he made he’d increase his stock, or buy some land for atrifle, and let it out in lots to the peasants," Levin added, smiling.He had evidently more than once come across those commercialcalculations. "And he’d make his fortune. But you and I must thank Godif we keep what we’ve got and leave it to our children."
"You’re married, I’ve heard?" said the landowner.
"Yes," Levin answered, with proud satisfaction. "Yes, it’s ratherstrange," he went on. "So we live without making anything, as though wewere ancient vestals set to keep in a fire."
The landowner chuckled under his white mustaches.
"There are some among us, too, like our friend Nikolay Ivanovitch, orCount Vronsky, that’s settled here lately, who try to carry on theirhusbandry as though it were a factory; but so far it leads to nothingbut making away with capital on it."
"But why is it we don’t do like the merchants? Why don’t we cut down ourparks for timber?" said Levin, returning to a thought that had struckhim.
"Why, as you said, to keep the fire in. Besides that’s not work for anobleman. And our work as noblemen isn’t done here at the elections, butyonder, each in our corner. There’s a class instinct, too, of what oneought and oughtn’t to do. There’s the peasants, too, I wonder at themsometimes; any good peasant tries to take all the land he can. Howeverbad the land is, he’ll work it. Without a return too. At a simple loss."
"Just as we do," said Levin. "Very, very glad to have met you," headded, seeing Sviazhsky approaching him.
"And here we’ve met for the first time since we met at your place," saidthe landowner to Sviazhsky, "and we’ve had a good talk too."
"Well, have you been attacking the new order of things?" said Sviazhskywith a smile.
"That we’re bound to do."
"You’ve relieved your feelings?"


Chapter 30

Sviazhsky took Levin’s arm, and went with him to his own friends. Thistime there was no avoiding Vronsky. He was standing with StepanArkadyevitch and Sergey Ivanovitch, and looking straight at Levin as hedrew near.
"Delighted! I believe I’ve had the pleasure of meeting you ... atPrincess Shtcherbatskaya’s," he said, giving Levin his hand.
"Yes, I quite remember our meeting," said Levin, and blushing crimson,he turned away immediately, and began talking to his brother.
With a slight smile Vronsky went on talking to Sviazhsky, obviouslywithout the slightest inclination to enter into conversation with Levin.But Levin, as he talked to his brother, was continually looking round atVronsky, trying to think of something to say to him to gloss over hisrudeness.
"What are we waiting for now?" asked Levin, looking at Sviazhsky andVronsky.
"For Snetkov. He has to refuse or to consent to stand," answeredSviazhsky.
"Well, and what has he done, consented or not?"
"That’s the point, that he’s done neither," said Vronsky.
"And if he refuses, who will stand then?" asked Levin, looking atVronsky.
"Whoever chooses to," said Sviazhsky.
"Shall you?" asked Levin.
"Certainly not I," said Sviazhsky, looking confused, and turning analarmed glance at the malignant gentleman, who was standing besideSergey Ivanovitch.
"Who then? Nevyedovsky?" said Levin, feeling he was putting his footinto it.
But this was worse still. Nevyedovsky and Sviazhsky were the twocandidates.
"I certainly shall not, under any circumstances," answered the malignantgentleman.
This was Nevyedovsky himself. Sviazhsky introduced him to Levin.
"Well, you find it exciting too?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, winking atVronsky. "It’s something like a race. One might bet on it."
"Yes, it is keenly exciting," said Vronsky. "And once taking the thingup, one’s eager to see it through. It’s a fight!" he said, scowling andsetting his powerful jaws.
"What a capable fellow Sviazhsky is! Sees it all so clearly."
"Oh, yes!" Vronsky assented indifferently.
A silence followed, during which Vronsky—since he had to look atsomething—looked at Levin, at his feet, at his uniform, then at hisface, and noticing his gloomy eyes fixed upon him, he said, in order tosay something:
"How is it that you, living constantly in the country, are not a justiceof the peace? You are not in the uniform of one."
"It’s because I consider that the justice of the peace is a sillyinstitution," Levin answered gloomily. He had been all the time lookingfor an opportunity to enter into conversation with Vronsky, so as tosmooth over his rudeness at their first meeting.
"I don’t think so, quite the contrary," Vronsky said, with quietsurprise.
"It’s a plaything," Levin cut him short. "We don’t want justices of thepeace. I’ve never had a single thing to do with them during eight years.And what I have had was decided wrongly by them. The justice of thepeace is over thirty miles from me. For some matter of two roubles Ishould have to send a lawyer, who costs me fifteen."
And he related how a peasant had stolen some flour from the miller, andwhen the miller told him of it, had lodged a complaint for slander. Allthis was utterly uncalled for and stupid, and Levin felt it himself ashe said it.
"Oh, this is such an original fellow!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch with hismost soothing, almond-oil smile. "But come along; I think they’revoting...."
And they separated.
"I can’t understand," said Sergey Ivanovitch, who had observed hisbrother’s clumsiness, "I can’t understand how anyone can be soabsolutely devoid of political tact. That’s where we Russians are sodeficient. The marshal of the province is our opponent, and with himyou’re _ami cochon_, and you beg him to stand. Count Vronsky, now ...I’m not making a friend of him; he’s asked me to dinner, and I’m notgoing; but he’s one of our side—why make an enemy of him? Then you askNevyedovsky if he’s going to stand. That’s not a thing to do."
"Oh, I don’t understand it at all! And it’s all such nonsense," Levinanswered gloomily.
"You say it’s all such nonsense, but as soon as you have anything to dowith it, you make a muddle."
Levin did not answer, and they walked together into the big room.
The marshal of the province, though he was vaguely conscious in the airof some trap being prepared for him, and though he had not been calledupon by all to stand, had still made up his mind to stand. All wassilence in the room. The secretary announced in a loud voice that thecaptain of the guards, Mihail Stepanovitch Snetkov, would now beballoted for as marshal of the province.
The district marshals walked carrying plates, on which were balls, fromtheir tables to the high table, and the election began.
"Put it in the right side," whispered Stepan Arkadyevitch, as with hisbrother Levin followed the marshal of his district to the table. ButLevin had forgotten by now the calculations that had been explained tohim, and was afraid Stepan Arkadyevitch might be mistaken in saying "theright side." Surely Snetkov was the enemy. As he went up, he held theball in his right hand, but thinking he was wrong, just at the box hechanged to the left hand, and undoubtedly put the ball to the left. Anadept in the business, standing at the box and seeing by the mere actionof the elbow where each put his ball, scowled with annoyance. It was nogood for him to use his insight.
Everything was still, and the counting of the balls was heard. Then asingle voice rose and proclaimed the numbers for and against. Themarshal had been voted for by a considerable majority. All was noise andeager movement towards the doors. Snetkov came in, and the noblesthronged round him, congratulating him.
"Well, now is it over?" Levin asked Sergey Ivanovitch.
"It’s only just beginning," Sviazhsky said, replying for SergeyIvanovitch with a smile. "Some other candidate may receive more votesthan the marshal."
Levin had quite forgotten about that. Now he could only remember thatthere was some sort of trickery in it, but he was too bored to thinkwhat it was exactly. He felt depressed, and longed to get out of thecrowd.
As no one was paying any attention to him, and no one apparently neededhim, he quietly slipped away into the little room where the refreshmentswere, and again had a great sense of comfort when he saw the waiters.The little old waiter pressed him to have something, and Levin agreed.After eating a cutlet with beans and talking to the waiters of theirformer masters, Levin, not wishing to go back to the hall, where it wasall so distasteful to him, proceeded to walk through the galleries. Thegalleries were full of fashionably dressed ladies, leaning over thebalustrade and trying not to lose a single word of what was being saidbelow. With the ladies were sitting and standing smart lawyers, highschool teachers in spectacles, and officers. Everywhere they weretalking of the election, and of how worried the marshal was, and howsplendid the discussions had been. In one group Levin heard hisbrother’s praises. One lady was telling a lawyer:
"How glad I am I heard Koznishev! It’s worth losing one’s dinner. He’sexquisite! So clear and distinct all of it! There’s not one of you inthe law courts that speaks like that. The only one is Meidel, and he’snot so eloquent by a long way."
Finding a free place, Levin leaned over the balustrade and began lookingand listening.
All the noblemen were sitting railed off behind barriers according totheir districts. In the middle of the room stood a man in a uniform, whoshouted in a loud, high voice:
"As a candidate for the marshalship of the nobility of the province wecall upon staff-captain Yevgeney Ivanovitch Apuhtin!" A dead silencefollowed, and then a weak old voice was heard: "Declined!"
"We call upon the privy councilor Pyotr Petrovitch Bol," the voice beganagain.
"Declined!" a high boyish voice replied.
Again it began, and again "Declined." And so it went on for about anhour. Levin, with his elbows on the balustrade, looked and listened. Atfirst he wondered and wanted to know what it meant; then feeling surethat he could not make it out he began to be bored. Then recalling allthe excitement and vindictiveness he had seen on all the faces, he feltsad; he made up his mind to go, and went downstairs. As he passedthrough the entry to the galleries he met a dejected high school boywalking up and down with tired-looking eyes. On the stairs he met acouple—a lady running quickly on her high heels and the jaunty deputyprosecutor.
"I told you you weren’t late," the deputy prosecutor was saying at themoment when Levin moved aside to let the lady pass.
Levin was on the stairs to the way out, and was just feeling in hiswaistcoat pocket for the number of his overcoat, when the secretaryovertook him.
"This way, please, Konstantin Dmitrievitch; they are voting."
The candidate who was being voted on was Nevyedovsky, who had so stoutlydenied all idea of standing. Levin went up to the door of the room; itwas locked. The secretary knocked, the door opened, and Levin was met bytwo red-faced gentlemen, who darted out.
"I can’t stand any more of it," said one red-faced gentleman.
After them the face of the marshal of the province was poked out. Hisface was dreadful-looking from exhaustion and dismay.
"I told you not to let any one out!" he cried to the doorkeeper.
"I let someone in, your excellency!"
"Mercy on us!" and with a heavy sigh the marshal of the province walkedwith downcast head to the high table in the middle of the room, his legsstaggering in his white trousers.
Nevyedovsky had scored a higher majority, as they had planned, and hewas the new marshal of the province. Many people were amused, many werepleased and happy, many were in ecstasies, many were disgusted andunhappy. The former marshal of the province was in a state of despair,which he could not conceal. When Nevyedovsky went out of the room, thecrowd thronged round him and followed him enthusiastically, just as theyhad followed the governor who had opened the meetings, and just as theyhad followed Snetkov when he was elected.


Chapter 31

The newly elected marshal and many of the successful party dined thatday with Vronsky.
Vronsky had come to the elections partly because he was bored in thecountry and wanted to show Anna his right to independence, and also torepay Sviazhsky by his support at the election for all the trouble hehad taken for Vronsky at the district council election, but chiefly inorder strictly to perform all those duties of a nobleman and landownerwhich he had taken upon himself. But he had not in the least expectedthat the election would so interest him, so keenly excite him, and thathe would be so good at this kind of thing. He was quite a new man in thecircle of the nobility of the province, but his success wasunmistakable, and he was not wrong in supposing that he had alreadyobtained a certain influence. This influence was due to his wealth andreputation, the capital house in the town lent him by his old friendShirkov, who had a post in the department of finances and was directorof a flourishing bank in Kashin; the excellent cook Vronsky had broughtfrom the country, and his friendship with the governor, who was aschoolfellow of Vronsky’s—a schoolfellow he had patronized and protectedindeed. But what contributed more than all to his success was hisdirect, equable manner with everyone, which very quickly made themajority of the noblemen reverse the current opinion of his supposedhaughtiness. He was himself conscious that, except that whimsicalgentleman married to Kitty Shtcherbatskaya, who had _à propos de bottes_poured out a stream of irrelevant absurdities with such spiteful fury,every nobleman with whom he had made acquaintance had become hisadherent. He saw clearly, and other people recognized it, too, that hehad done a great deal to secure the success of Nevyedovsky. And now athis own table, celebrating Nevyedovsky’s election, he was experiencingan agreeable sense of triumph over the success of his candidate. Theelection itself had so fascinated him that, if he could succeed ingetting married during the next three years, he began to think ofstanding himself—much as after winning a race ridden by a jockey, he hadlonged to ride a race himself.
Today he was celebrating the success of his jockey. Vronsky sat at thehead of the table, on his right hand sat the young governor, a generalof high rank. To all the rest he was the chief man in the province, whohad solemnly opened the elections with his speech, and aroused a feelingof respect and even of awe in many people, as Vronsky saw; to Vronsky hewas little Katka Maslov—that had been his nickname in the Pages’Corps—whom he felt to be shy and tried to _mettre à son aise_. On theleft hand sat Nevyedovsky with his youthful, stubborn, and malignantface. With him Vronsky was simple and deferential.
Sviazhsky took his failure very light-heartedly. It was indeed nofailure in his eyes, as he said himself, turning, glass in hand, toNevyedovsky; they could not have found a better representative of thenew movement, which the nobility ought to follow. And so every honestperson, as he said, was on the side of today’s success and was rejoicingover it.
Stepan Arkadyevitch was glad, too, that he was having a good time, andthat everyone was pleased. The episode of the elections served as a goodoccasion for a capital dinner. Sviazhsky comically imitated the tearfuldiscourse of the marshal, and observed, addressing Nevyedovsky, that hisexcellency would have to select another more complicated method ofauditing the accounts than tears. Another nobleman jocosely describedhow footmen in stockings had been ordered for the marshal’s ball, andhow now they would have to be sent back unless the new marshal wouldgive a ball with footmen in stockings.
Continually during dinner they said of Nevyedovsky: "our marshal," and"your excellency."
This was said with the same pleasure with which a bride is called"Madame" and her husband’s name. Nevyedovsky affected to be not merelyindifferent but scornful of this appellation, but it was obvious that hewas highly delighted, and had to keep a curb on himself not to betraythe triumph which was unsuitable to their new liberal tone.
After dinner several telegrams were sent to people interested in theresult of the election. And Stepan Arkadyevitch, who was in high goodhumor, sent Darya Alexandrovna a telegram: "Nevyedovsky elected bytwenty votes. Congratulations. Tell people." He dictated it aloud,saying: "We must let them share our rejoicing." Darya Alexandrovna,getting the message, simply sighed over the rouble wasted on it, andunderstood that it was an after-dinner affair. She knew Stiva had aweakness after dining for _faire jouer le télégraphe._
Everything, together with the excellent dinner and the wine, not fromRussian merchants, but imported direct from abroad, was extremelydignified, simple, and enjoyable. The party—some twenty—had beenselected by Sviazhsky from among the more active new liberals, all ofthe same way of thinking, who were at the same time clever and wellbred. They drank, also half in jest, to the health of the new marshal ofthe province, of the governor, of the bank director, and of "our amiablehost."
Vronsky was satisfied. He had never expected to find so pleasant a tonein the provinces.
Towards the end of dinner it was still more lively. The governor askedVronsky to come to a concert for the benefit of the Servians which hiswife, who was anxious to make his acquaintance, had been getting up.
"There’ll be a ball, and you’ll see the belle of the province. Worthseeing, really."
"Not in my line," Vronsky answered. He liked that English phrase. But hesmiled, and promised to come.
Before they rose from the table, when all of them were smoking,Vronsky’s valet went up to him with a letter on a tray.
"From Vozdvizhenskoe by special messenger," he said with a significantexpression.
"Astonishing! how like he is to the deputy prosecutor Sventitsky," saidone of the guests in French of the valet, while Vronsky, frowning, readthe letter.
The letter was from Anna. Before he read the letter, he knew itscontents. Expecting the elections to be over in five days, he hadpromised to be back on Friday. Today was Saturday, and he knew that theletter contained reproaches for not being back at the time fixed. Theletter he had sent the previous evening had probably not reached heryet.
The letter was what he had expected, but the form of it was unexpected,and particularly disagreeable to him. "Annie is very ill, the doctorsays it may be inflammation. I am losing my head all alone. PrincessVarvara is no help, but a hindrance. I expected you the day beforeyesterday, and yesterday, and now I am sending to find out where you areand what you are doing. I wanted to come myself, but thought better ofit, knowing you would dislike it. Send some answer, that I may know whatto do."
The child ill, yet she had thought of coming herself. Their daughterill, and this hostile tone.
The innocent festivities over the election, and this gloomy, burdensomelove to which he had to return struck Vronsky by their contrast. But hehad to go, and by the first train that night he set off home.


Chapter 32

Before Vronsky’s departure for the elections, Anna had reflected thatthe scenes constantly repeated between them each time he left home,might only make him cold to her instead of attaching him to her, andresolved to do all she could to control herself so as to bear theparting with composure. But the cold, severe glance with which he hadlooked at her when he came to tell her he was going had wounded her, andbefore he had started her peace of mind was destroyed.
In solitude afterwards, thinking over that glance which had expressedhis right to freedom, she came, as she always did, to the same point—thesense of her own humiliation. "He has the right to go away when andwhere he chooses. Not simply to go away, but to leave me. He has everyright, and I have none. But knowing that, he ought not to do it. Whathas he done, though?... He looked at me with a cold, severe expression.Of course that is something indefinable, impalpable, but it has neverbeen so before, and that glance means a great deal," she thought. "Thatglance shows the beginning of indifference."
And though she felt sure that a coldness was beginning, there wasnothing she could do, she could not in any way alter her relations tohim. Just as before, only by love and by charm could she keep him. Andso, just as before, only by occupation in the day, by morphine at night,could she stifle the fearful thought of what would be if he ceased tolove her. It is true there was still one means; not to keep him—for thatshe wanted nothing more than his love—but to be nearer to him, to be insuch a position that he would not leave her. That means was divorce andmarriage. And she began to long for that, and made up her mind to agreeto it the first time he or Stiva approached her on the subject.
Absorbed in such thoughts, she passed five days without him, the fivedays that he was to be at the elections.
Walks, conversation with Princess Varvara, visits to the hospital, and,most of all, reading—reading of one book after another—filled up hertime. But on the sixth day, when the coachman came back without him, shefelt that now she was utterly incapable of stifling the thought of himand of what he was doing there, just at that time her little girl wastaken ill. Anna began to look after her, but even that did not distracther mind, especially as the illness was not serious. However hard shetried, she could not love this little child, and to feign love wasbeyond her powers. Towards the evening of that day, still alone, Annawas in such a panic about him that she decided to start for the town,but on second thoughts wrote him the contradictory letter that Vronskyreceived, and without reading it through, sent it off by a specialmessenger. The next morning she received his letter and regretted herown. She dreaded a repetition of the severe look he had flung at her atparting, especially when he knew that the baby was not dangerously ill.But still she was glad she had written to him. At this moment Anna waspositively admitting to herself that she was a burden to him, that hewould relinquish his freedom regretfully to return to her, and in spiteof that she was glad he was coming. Let him weary of her, but he wouldbe here with her, so that she would see him, would know of every actionhe took.
She was sitting in the drawing room near a lamp, with a new volume ofTaine, and as she read, listening to the sound of the wind outside, andevery minute expecting the carriage to arrive. Several times she hadfancied she heard the sound of wheels, but she had been mistaken. Atlast she heard not the sound of wheels, but the coachman’s shout and thedull rumble in the covered entry. Even Princess Varvara, playingpatience, confirmed this, and Anna, flushing hotly, got up; but insteadof going down, as she had done twice before, she stood still. Shesuddenly felt ashamed of her duplicity, but even more she dreaded how hemight meet her. All feeling of wounded pride had passed now; she wasonly afraid of the expression of his displeasure. She remembered thather child had been perfectly well again for the last two days. She feltpositively vexed with her for getting better from the very moment herletter was sent off. Then she thought of him, that he was here, all ofhim, with his hands, his eyes. She heard his voice. And forgettingeverything, she ran joyfully to meet him.
"Well, how is Annie?" he said timidly from below, looking up to Anna asshe ran down to him.
He was sitting on a chair, and a footman was pulling off his warmover-boot.
"Oh, she is better."
"And you?" he said, shaking himself.
She took his hand in both of hers, and drew it to her waist, nevertaking her eyes off him.
"Well, I’m glad," he said, coldly scanning her, her hair, her dress,which he knew she had put on for him. All was charming, but how manytimes it had charmed him! And the stern, stony expression that she sodreaded settled upon his face.
"Well, I’m glad. And are you well?" he said, wiping his damp beard withhis handkerchief and kissing her hand.
"Never mind," she thought, "only let him be here, and so long as he’shere he cannot, he dare not, cease to love me."
The evening was spent happily and gaily in the presence of PrincessVarvara, who complained to him that Anna had been taking morphine in hisabsence.
"What am I to do? I couldn’t sleep.... My thoughts prevented me. Whenhe’s here I never take it—hardly ever."
He told her about the election, and Anna knew how by adroit questions tobring him to what gave him most pleasure—his own success. She told himof everything that interested him at home; and all that she told him wasof the most cheerful description.
But late in the evening, when they were alone, Anna, seeing that she hadregained complete possession of him, wanted to erase the painfulimpression of the glance he had given her for her letter. She said:
"Tell me frankly, you were vexed at getting my letter, and you didn’tbelieve me?"
As soon as she had said it, she felt that however warm his feelings wereto her, he had not forgiven her for that.
"Yes," he said, "the letter was so strange. First, Annie ill, and thenyou thought of coming yourself."
"It was all the truth."
"Oh, I don’t doubt it."
"Yes, you do doubt it. You are vexed, I see."
"Not for one moment. I’m only vexed, that’s true, that you seem somehowunwilling to admit that there are duties..."
"The duty of going to a concert..."
"But we won’t talk about it," he said.
"Why not talk about it?" she said.
"I only meant to say that matters of real importance may turn up. Now,for instance, I shall have to go to Moscow to arrange about thehouse.... Oh, Anna, why are you so irritable? Don’t you know that Ican’t live without you?"
"If so," said Anna, her voice suddenly changing, "it means that you aresick of this life.... Yes, you will come for a day and go away, as mendo..."
"Anna, that’s cruel. I am ready to give up my whole life."
But she did not hear him.
"If you go to Moscow, I will go too. I will not stay here. Either wemust separate or else live together."
"Why, you know, that’s my one desire. But for that..."
"We must get a divorce. I will write to him. I see I cannot go on likethis.... But I will come with you to Moscow."
"You talk as if you were threatening me. But I desire nothing so much asnever to be parted from you," said Vronsky, smiling.
But as he said these words there gleamed in his eyes not merely a coldlook, but the vindictive look of a man persecuted and made cruel.
She saw the look and correctly divined its meaning.
"If so, it’s a calamity!" that glance told her. It was a moment’simpression, but she never forgot it.
Anna wrote to her husband asking him about a divorce, and towards theend of November, taking leave of Princess Varvara, who wanted to go toPetersburg, she went with Vronsky to Moscow. Expecting every day ananswer from Alexey Alexandrovitch, and after that the divorce, they nowestablished themselves together like married people.



PART SEVEN


Chapter 1

The Levins had been three months in Moscow. The date had long passed onwhich, according to the most trustworthy calculations of people learnedin such matters, Kitty should have been confined. But she was stillabout, and there was nothing to show that her time was any nearer thantwo months ago. The doctor, the monthly nurse, and Dolly and her mother,and most of all Levin, who could not think of the approaching eventwithout terror, began to be impatient and uneasy. Kitty was the onlyperson who felt perfectly calm and happy.
She was distinctly conscious now of the birth of a new feeling of lovefor the future child, for her to some extent actually existing already,and she brooded blissfully over this feeling. He was not by nowaltogether a part of herself, but sometimes lived his own lifeindependently of her. Often this separate being gave her pain, but atthe same time she wanted to laugh with a strange new joy.
All the people she loved were with her, and all were so good to her, soattentively caring for her, so entirely pleasant was everythingpresented to her, that if she had not known and felt that it must allsoon be over, she could not have wished for a better and pleasanterlife. The only thing that spoiled the charm of this manner of life wasthat her husband was not here as she loved him to be, and as he was inthe country.
She liked his serene, friendly, and hospitable manner in the country. Inthe town he seemed continually uneasy and on his guard, as though hewere afraid someone would be rude to him, and still more to her. At homein the country, knowing himself distinctly to be in his right place, hewas never in haste to be off elsewhere. He was never unoccupied. Here intown he was in a continual hurry, as though afraid of missing something,and yet he had nothing to do. And she felt sorry for him. To others, sheknew, he did not appear an object of pity. On the contrary, when Kittylooked at him in society, as one sometimes looks at those one loves,trying to see him as if he were a stranger, so as to catch theimpression he must make on others, she saw with a panic even of jealousfear that he was far indeed from being a pitiable figure, that he wasvery attractive with his fine breeding, his rather old-fashioned,reserved courtesy with women, his powerful figure, and striking, as shethought, and expressive face. But she saw him not from without, but fromwithin; she saw that here he was not himself; that was the only way shecould define his condition to herself. Sometimes she inwardly reproachedhim for his inability to live in the town; sometimes she recognized thatit was really hard for him to order his life here so that he could besatisfied with it.
What had he to do, indeed? He did not care for cards; he did not go to aclub. Spending the time with jovial gentlemen of Oblonsky’s type—sheknew now what that meant ... it meant drinking and going somewhere afterdrinking. She could not think without horror of where men went on suchoccasions. Was he to go into society? But she knew he could only findsatisfaction in that if he took pleasure in the society of young women,and that she could not wish for. Should he stay at home with her, hermother and her sisters? But much as she liked and enjoyed theirconversations forever on the same subjects—"Aline-Nadine," as the oldprince called the sisters’ talks—she knew it must bore him. What wasthere left for him to do? To go on writing at his book he had indeedattempted, and at first he used to go to the library and make extractsand look up references for his book. But, as he told her, the more hedid nothing, the less time he had to do anything. And besides, hecomplained that he had talked too much about his book here, and thatconsequently all his ideas about it were muddled and had lost theirinterest for him.
One advantage in this town life was that quarrels hardly ever happenedbetween them here in town. Whether it was that their conditions weredifferent, or that they had both become more careful and sensible inthat respect, they had no quarrels in Moscow from jealousy, which theyhad so dreaded when they moved from the country.
One event, an event of great importance to both from that point of view,did indeed happen—that was Kitty’s meeting with Vronsky.
The old Princess Marya Borissovna, Kitty’s godmother, who had alwaysbeen very fond of her, had insisted on seeing her. Kitty, though she didnot go into society at all on account of her condition, went with herfather to see the venerable old lady, and there met Vronsky.
The only thing Kitty could reproach herself for at this meeting was thatat the instant when she recognized in his civilian dress the featuresonce so familiar to her, her breath failed her, the blood rushed to herheart, and a vivid blush—she felt it—overspread her face. But thislasted only a few seconds. Before her father, who purposely begantalking in a loud voice to Vronsky, had finished, she was perfectlyready to look at Vronsky, to speak to him, if necessary, exactly as shespoke to Princess Marya Borissovna, and more than that, to do so in sucha way that everything to the faintest intonation and smile would havebeen approved by her husband, whose unseen presence she seemed to feelabout her at that instant.
She said a few words to him, even smiled serenely at his joke about theelections, which he called "our parliament." (She had to smile to showshe saw the joke.) But she turned away immediately to Princess MaryaBorissovna, and did not once glance at him till he got up to go; thenshe looked at him, but evidently only because it would be uncivil not tolook at a man when he is saying good-bye.
She was grateful to her father for saying nothing to her about theirmeeting Vronsky, but she saw by his special warmth to her after thevisit during their usual walk that he was pleased with her. She waspleased with herself. She had not expected she would have had the power,while keeping somewhere in the bottom of her heart all the memories ofher old feeling for Vronsky, not only to seem but to be perfectlyindifferent and composed with him.
Levin flushed a great deal more than she when she told him she had metVronsky at Princess Marya Borissovna’s. It was very hard for her to tellhim this, but still harder to go on speaking of the details of themeeting, as he did not question her, but simply gazed at her with afrown.
"I am very sorry you weren’t there," she said. "Not that you weren’t inthe room ... I couldn’t have been so natural in your presence ... I amblushing now much more, much, much more," she said, blushing till thetears came into her eyes. "But that you couldn’t see through a crack."
The truthful eyes told Levin that she was satisfied with herself, and inspite of her blushing he was quickly reassured and began questioningher, which was all she wanted. When he had heard everything, even to thedetail that for the first second she could not help flushing, but thatafterwards she was just as direct and as much at her ease as with anychance acquaintance, Levin was quite happy again and said he was glad ofit, and would not now behave as stupidly as he had done at the election,but would try the first time he met Vronsky to be as friendly aspossible.
"It’s so wretched to feel that there’s a man almost an enemy whom it’spainful to meet," said Levin. "I’m very, very glad."


Chapter 2

"Go, please, go then and call on the Bols," Kitty said to her husband,when he came in to see her at eleven o’clock before going out. "I knowyou are dining at the club; papa put down your name. But what are yougoing to do in the morning?"
"I am only going to Katavasov," answered Levin.
"Why so early?"
"He promised to introduce me to Metrov. I wanted to talk to him about mywork. He’s a distinguished scientific man from Petersburg," said Levin.
"Yes; wasn’t it his article you were praising so? Well, and after that?"said Kitty.
"I shall go to the court, perhaps, about my sister’s business."
"And the concert?" she queried.
"I shan’t go there all alone."
"No? do go; there are going to be some new things.... That interestedyou so. I should certainly go."
"Well, anyway, I shall come home before dinner," he said, looking at hiswatch.
"Put on your frock coat, so that you can go straight to call on CountessBola."
"But is it absolutely necessary?"
"Oh, absolutely! He has been to see us. Come, what is it? You go in, sitdown, talk for five minutes of the weather, get up and go away."
"Oh, you wouldn’t believe it! I’ve got so out of the way of all thisthat it makes me feel positively ashamed. It’s such a horrible thing todo! A complete outsider walks in, sits down, stays on with nothing todo, wastes their time and worries himself, and walks away!"
Kitty laughed.
"Why, I suppose you used to pay calls before you were married, didn’tyou?"
"Yes, I did, but I always felt ashamed, and now I’m so out of the way ofit that, by Jove! I’d sooner go two days running without my dinner thanpay this call! One’s so ashamed! I feel all the while that they’reannoyed, that they’re saying, ‘What has he come for?’"
"No, they won’t. I’ll answer for that," said Kitty, looking into hisface with a laugh. She took his hand. "Well, good-bye.... Do go,please."
He was just going out after kissing his wife’s hand, when she stoppedhim.
"Kostya, do you know I’ve only fifty roubles left?"
"Oh, all right, I’ll go to the bank and get some. How much?" he said,with the expression of dissatisfaction she knew so well.
"No, wait a minute." She held his hand. "Let’s talk about it, it worriesme. I seem to spend nothing unnecessary, but money seems to fly awaysimply. We don’t manage well, somehow."
"Oh, it’s all right," he said with a little cough, looking at her fromunder his brows.
That cough she knew well. It was a sign of intense dissatisfaction, notwith her, but with himself. He certainly was displeased not at so muchmoney being spent, but at being reminded of what he, knowing somethingwas unsatisfactory, wanted to forget.
"I have told Sokolov to sell the wheat, and to borrow an advance on themill. We shall have money enough in any case."
"Yes, but I’m afraid that altogether..."
"Oh, it’s all right, all right," he repeated. "Well, good-bye, darling."
"No, I’m really sorry sometimes that I listened to mamma. How nice itwould have been in the country! As it is, I’m worrying you all, andwe’re wasting our money."
"Not at all, not at all. Not once since I’ve been married have I saidthat things could have been better than they are...."
"Truly?" she said, looking into his eyes.
He had said it without thinking, simply to console her. But when heglanced at her and saw those sweet truthful eyes fastened questioninglyon him, he repeated it with his whole heart. "I was positivelyforgetting her," he thought. And he remembered what was before them, sosoon to come.
"Will it be soon? How do you feel?" he whispered, taking her two hands.
"I have so often thought so, that now I don’t think about it or knowanything about it."
"And you’re not frightened?"
She smiled contemptuously.
"Not the least little bit," she said.
"Well, if anything happens, I shall be at Katavasov’s."
"No, nothing will happen, and don’t think about it. I’m going for a walkon the boulevard with papa. We’re going to see Dolly. I shall expect youbefore dinner. Oh, yes! Do you know that Dolly’s position is becomingutterly impossible? She’s in debt all round; she hasn’t a penny. We weretalking yesterday with mamma and Arseny" (this was her sister’s husbandLvov), "and we determined to send you with him to talk to Stiva. It’sreally unbearable. One can’t speak to papa about it.... But if you andhe..."
"Why, what can we do?" said Levin.
"You’ll be at Arseny’s, anyway; talk to him, he will tell what wedecided."
"Oh, I agree to everything Arseny thinks beforehand. I’ll go and seehim. By the way, if I do go to the concert, I’ll go with Natalia. Well,good-bye."
On the steps Levin was stopped by his old servant Kouzma, who had beenwith him before his marriage, and now looked after their household intown.
"Beauty" (that was the left shaft-horse brought up from the country)"has been badly shod and is quite lame," he said. "What does your honorwish to be done?"
During the first part of their stay in Moscow, Levin had used his ownhorses brought up from the country. He had tried to arrange this part oftheir expenses in the best and cheapest way possible; but it appearedthat their own horses came dearer than hired horses, and they stillhired too.
"Send for the veterinary, there may be a bruise."
"And for Katerina Alexandrovna?" asked Kouzma.
Levin was not by now struck as he had been at first by the fact that toget from one end of Moscow to the other he had to have two powerfulhorses put into a heavy carriage, to take the carriage three milesthrough the snowy slush and to keep it standing there four hours, payingfive roubles every time.
Now it seemed quite natural.
"Hire a pair for our carriage from the jobmaster," said he.
"Yes, sir."
And so, simply and easily, thanks to the facilities of town life, Levinsettled a question which, in the country, would have called for so muchpersonal trouble and exertion, and going out onto the steps, he called asledge, sat down, and drove to Nikitsky. On the way he thought no moreof money, but mused on the introduction that awaited him to thePetersburg savant, a writer on sociology, and what he would say to himabout his book.
Only during the first days of his stay in Moscow Levin had been struckby the expenditure, strange to one living in the country, unproductivebut inevitable, that was expected of him on every side. But by now hehad grown used to it. That had happened to him in this matter which issaid to happen to drunkards—the first glass sticks in the throat, thesecond flies down like a hawk, but after the third they’re like tinylittle birds. When Levin had changed his first hundred-rouble note topay for liveries for his footmen and hall-porter he could not helpreflecting that these liveries were of no use to anyone—but they wereindubitably necessary, to judge by the amazement of the princess andKitty when he suggested that they might do without liveries,—that theseliveries would cost the wages of two laborers for the summer, that is,would pay for about three hundred working days from Easter to AshWednesday, and each a day of hard work from early morning to lateevening—and that hundred-rouble note did stick in his throat. But thenext note, changed to pay for providing a dinner for their relations,that cost twenty-eight roubles, though it did excite in Levin thereflection that twenty-eight roubles meant nine measures of oats, whichmen would with groans and sweat have reaped and bound and thrashed andwinnowed and sifted and sown,—this next one he parted with more easily.And now the notes he changed no longer aroused such reflections, andthey flew off like little birds. Whether the labor devoted to obtainingthe money corresponded to the pleasure given by what was bought with it,was a consideration he had long ago dismissed. His business calculationthat there was a certain price below which he could not sell certaingrain was forgotten too. The rye, for the price of which he had so longheld out, had been sold for fifty kopecks a measure cheaper than it hadbeen fetching a month ago. Even the consideration that with such anexpenditure he could not go on living for a year without debt, that evenhad no force. Only one thing was essential: to have money in the bank,without inquiring where it came from, so as to know that one had thewherewithal to buy meat for tomorrow. And this condition had hithertobeen fulfilled; he had always had the money in the bank. But now themoney in the bank had gone, and he could not quite tell where to get thenext installment. And this it was which, at the moment when Kitty hadmentioned money, had disturbed him; but he had no time to think aboutit. He drove off, thinking of Katavasov and the meeting with Metrov thatwas before him.


Chapter 3

Levin had on this visit to town seen a great deal of his old friend atthe university, Professor Katavasov, whom he had not seen since hismarriage. He liked in Katavasov the clearness and simplicity of hisconception of life. Levin thought that the clearness of Katavasov’sconception of life was due to the poverty of his nature; Katavasovthought that the disconnectedness of Levin’s ideas was due to his lackof intellectual discipline; but Levin enjoyed Katavasov’s clearness, andKatavasov enjoyed the abundance of Levin’s untrained ideas, and theyliked to meet and to discuss.
Levin had read Katavasov some parts of his book, and he had liked them.On the previous day Katavasov had met Levin at a public lecture and toldhim that the celebrated Metrov, whose article Levin had so much liked,was in Moscow, that he had been much interested by what Katavasov hadtold him about Levin’s work, and that he was coming to see him tomorrowat eleven, and would be very glad to make Levin’s acquaintance.
"You’re positively a reformed character, I’m glad to see," saidKatavasov, meeting Levin in the little drawing room. "I heard the belland thought: Impossible that it can be he at the exact time!... Well,what do you say to the Montenegrins now? They’re a race of warriors."
"Why, what’s happened?" asked Levin.
Katavasov in a few words told him the last piece of news from the war,and going into his study, introduced Levin to a short, thick-set man ofpleasant appearance. This was Metrov. The conversation touched for abrief space on politics and on how recent events were looked at in thehigher spheres in Petersburg. Metrov repeated a saying that had reachedhim through a most trustworthy source, reported as having been utteredon this subject by the Tsar and one of the ministers. Katavasov hadheard also on excellent authority that the Tsar had said something quitedifferent. Levin tried to imagine circumstances in which both sayingsmight have been uttered, and the conversation on that topic dropped.
"Yes, here he’s written almost a book on the natural conditions of thelaborer in relation to the land," said Katavasov; "I’m not a specialist,but I, as a natural science man, was pleased at his not taking mankindas something outside biological laws; but, on the contrary, seeing hisdependence on his surroundings, and in that dependence seeking the lawsof his development."
"That’s very interesting," said Metrov.
"What I began precisely was to write a book on agriculture; but studyingthe chief instrument of agriculture, the laborer," said Levin,reddening, "I could not help coming to quite unexpected results."
And Levin began carefully, as it were, feeling his ground, to expoundhis views. He knew Metrov had written an article against the generallyaccepted theory of political economy, but to what extent he could reckonon his sympathy with his own new views he did not know and could notguess from the clever and serene face of the learned man.
"But in what do you see the special characteristics of the Russianlaborer?" said Metrov; "in his biological characteristics, so to speak,or in the condition in which he is placed?"
Levin saw that there was an idea underlying this question with which hedid not agree. But he went on explaining his own idea that the Russianlaborer has a quite special view of the land, different from that ofother people; and to support this proposition he made haste to add thatin his opinion this attitude of the Russian peasant was due to theconsciousness of his vocation to people vast unoccupied expanses in theEast.
"One may easily be led into error in basing any conclusion on thegeneral vocation of a people," said Metrov, interrupting Levin. "Thecondition of the laborer will always depend on his relation to the landand to capital."
And without letting Levin finish explaining his idea, Metrov beganexpounding to him the special point of his own theory.
In what the point of his theory lay, Levin did not understand, becausehe did not take the trouble to understand. He saw that Metrov, likeother people, in spite of his own article, in which he had attacked thecurrent theory of political economy, looked at the position of theRussian peasant simply from the point of view of capital, wages, andrent. He would indeed have been obliged to admit that in theeastern—much the larger—part of Russia rent was as yet nil, that fornine-tenths of the eighty millions of the Russian peasants wages tookthe form simply of food provided for themselves, and that capital doesnot so far exist except in the form of the most primitive tools. Yet itwas only from that point of view that he considered every laborer,though in many points he differed from the economists and had his owntheory of the wage-fund, which he expounded to Levin.
Levin listened reluctantly, and at first made objections. He would haveliked to interrupt Metrov, to explain his own thought, which in hisopinion would have rendered further exposition of Metrov’s theoriessuperfluous. But later on, feeling convinced that they looked at thematter so differently, that they could never understand one another, hedid not even oppose his statements, but simply listened. Although whatMetrov was saying was by now utterly devoid of interest for him, he yetexperienced a certain satisfaction in listening to him. It flattered hisvanity that such a learned man should explain his ideas to him soeagerly, with such intensity and confidence in Levin’s understanding ofthe subject, sometimes with a mere hint referring him to a whole aspectof the subject. He put this down to his own credit, unaware that Metrov,who had already discussed his theory over and over again with all hisintimate friends, talked of it with special eagerness to every newperson, and in general was eager to talk to anyone of any subject thatinterested him, even if still obscure to himself.
"We are late though," said Katavasov, looking at his watch directlyMetrov had finished his discourse.
"Yes, there’s a meeting of the Society of Amateurs today incommemoration of the jubilee of Svintitch," said Katavasov in answer toLevin’s inquiry. "Pyotr Ivanovitch and I were going. I’ve promised todeliver an address on his labors in zoology. Come along with us, it’svery interesting."
"Yes, and indeed it’s time to start," said Metrov. "Come with us, andfrom there, if you care to, come to my place. I should very much like tohear your work."
"Oh, no! It’s no good yet, it’s unfinished. But I shall be very glad togo to the meeting."
"I say, friends, have you heard? He has handed in the separate report,"Katavasov called from the other room, where he was putting on his frockcoat.
And a conversation sprang up upon the university question, which was avery important event that winter in Moscow. Three old professors in thecouncil had not accepted the opinion of the younger professors. Theyoung ones had registered a separate resolution. This, in the judgmentof some people, was monstrous, in the judgment of others it was thesimplest and most just thing to do, and the professors were split upinto two parties.
One party, to which Katavasov belonged, saw in the opposite party ascoundrelly betrayal and treachery, while the opposite party saw in themchildishness and lack of respect for the authorities. Levin, though hedid not belong to the university, had several times already during hisstay in Moscow heard and talked about this matter, and had his ownopinion on the subject. He took part in the conversation that wascontinued in the street, as they all three walked to the buildings ofthe old university.
The meeting had already begun. Round the cloth-covered table, at whichKatavasov and Metrov seated themselves, there were some half-dozenpersons, and one of these was bending close over a manuscript, readingsomething aloud. Levin sat down in one of the empty chairs that werestanding round the table, and in a whisper asked a student sitting nearwhat was being read. The student, eyeing Levin with displeasure, said:
"Biography."
Though Levin was not interested in the biography, he could not helplistening, and learned some new and interesting facts about the life ofthe distinguished man of science.
When the reader had finished, the chairman thanked him and read someverses of the poet Ment sent him on the jubilee, and said a few words byway of thanks to the poet. Then Katavasov in his loud, ringing voiceread his address on the scientific labors of the man whose jubilee wasbeing kept.
When Katavasov had finished, Levin looked at his watch, saw it was pastone, and thought that there would not be time before the concert to readMetrov his book, and indeed, he did not now care to do so. During thereading he had thought over their conversation. He saw distinctly nowthat though Metrov’s ideas might perhaps have value, his own ideas had avalue too, and their ideas could only be made clear and lead tosomething if each worked separately in his chosen path, and that nothingwould be gained by putting their ideas together. And having made up hismind to refuse Metrov’s invitation, Levin went up to him at the end ofthe meeting. Metrov introduced Levin to the chairman, with whom he wastalking of the political news. Metrov told the chairman what he hadalready told Levin, and Levin made the same remarks on his news that hehad already made that morning, but for the sake of variety he expressedalso a new opinion which had only just struck him. After that theconversation turned again on the university question. As Levin hadalready heard it all, he made haste to tell Metrov that he was sorry hecould not take advantage of his invitation, took leave, and drove toLvov’s.


Chapter 4

Lvov, the husband of Natalia, Kitty’s sister, had spent all his life inforeign capitals, where he had been educated, and had been in thediplomatic service.
During the previous year he had left the diplomatic service, not owingto any "unpleasantness" (he never had any "unpleasantness" with anyone),and was transferred to the department of the court of the palace inMoscow, in order to give his two boys the best education possible.
In spite of the striking contrast in their habits and views and the factthat Lvov was older than Levin, they had seen a great deal of oneanother that winter, and had taken a great liking to each other.
Lvov was at home, and Levin went in to him unannounced.
Lvov, in a house coat with a belt and in chamois leather shoes, wassitting in an armchair, and with a pince-nez with blue glasses he wasreading a book that stood on a reading desk, while in his beautiful handhe held a half-burned cigarette daintily away from him.
His handsome, delicate, and still youthful-looking face, to which hiscurly, glistening silvery hair gave a still more aristocratic air,lighted up with a smile when he saw Levin.
"Capital! I was meaning to send to you. How’s Kitty? Sit here, it’s morecomfortable." He got up and pushed up a rocking chair. "Have you readthe last circular in the _Journal de St. Petersbourg?_ I think it’sexcellent," he said, with a slight French accent.
Levin told him what he had heard from Katavasov was being said inPetersburg, and after talking a little about politics, he told him ofhis interview with Metrov, and the learned society’s meeting. To Lvov itwas very interesting.
"That’s what I envy you, that you are able to mix in these interestingscientific circles," he said. And as he talked, he passed as usual intoFrench, which was easier to him. "It’s true I haven’t the time for it.My official work and the children leave me no time; and then I’m notashamed to own that my education has been too defective."
"That I don’t believe," said Levin with a smile, feeling, as he alwaysdid, touched at Lvov’s low opinion of himself, which was not in theleast put on from a desire to seem or to be modest, but was absolutelysincere.
"Oh, yes, indeed! I feel now how badly educated I am. To educate mychildren I positively have to look up a great deal, and in fact simplyto study myself. For it’s not enough to have teachers, there must besomeone to look after them, just as on your land you want laborers andan overseer. See what I’m reading"—he pointed to Buslaev’s _Grammar_ onthe desk—"it’s expected of Misha, and it’s so difficult.... Come,explain to me.... Here he says..."
Levin tried to explain to him that it couldn’t be understood, but thatit had to be taught; but Lvov would not agree with him.
"Oh, you’re laughing at it!"
"On the contrary, you can’t imagine how, when I look at you, I’m alwayslearning the task that lies before me, that is the education of one’schildren."
"Well, there’s nothing for you to learn," said Lvov.
"All I know," said Levin, "is that I have never seen better brought-upchildren than yours, and I wouldn’t wish for children better thanyours."
Lvov visibly tried to restrain the expression of his delight, but he waspositively radiant with smiles.
"If only they’re better than I! That’s all I desire. You don’t know yetall the work," he said, "with boys who’ve been left like mine to runwild abroad."
"You’ll catch all that up. They’re such clever children. The great thingis the education of character. That’s what I learn when I look at yourchildren."
"You talk of the education of character. You can’t imagine how difficultthat is! You have hardly succeeded in combating one tendency when otherscrop up, and the struggle begins again. If one had not a support inreligion—you remember we talked about that—no father could bringchildren up relying on his own strength alone without that help."
This subject, which always interested Levin, was cut short by theentrance of the beauty Natalia Alexandrovna, dressed to go out.
"I didn’t know you were here," she said, unmistakably feeling no regret,but a positive pleasure, in interrupting this conversation on a topicshe had heard so much of that she was by now weary of it. "Well, how isKitty? I am dining with you today. I tell you what, Arseny," she turnedto her husband, "you take the carriage."
And the husband and wife began to discuss their arrangements for theday. As the husband had to drive to meet someone on official business,while the wife had to go to the concert and some public meeting of acommittee on the Eastern Question, there was a great deal to considerand settle. Levin had to take part in their plans as one of themselves.It was settled that Levin should go with Natalia to the concert and themeeting, and that from there they should send the carriage to the officefor Arseny, and he should call for her and take her to Kitty’s; or that,if he had not finished his work, he should send the carriage back andLevin would go with her.
"He’s spoiling me," Lvov said to his wife; "he assures me that ourchildren are splendid, when I know how much that’s bad there is inthem."
"Arseny goes to extremes, I always say," said his wife. "If you look forperfection, you will never be satisfied. And it’s true, as papasays,—that when we were brought up there was one extreme—we were kept inthe basement, while our parents lived in the best rooms; now it’s justthe other way—the parents are in the wash house, while the children arein the best rooms. Parents now are not expected to live at all, but toexist altogether for their children."
"Well, what if they like it better?" Lvov said, with his beautifulsmile, touching her hand. "Anyone who didn’t know you would think youwere a stepmother, not a true mother."
"No, extremes are not good in anything," Natalia said serenely, puttinghis paper knife straight in its proper place on the table.
"Well, come here, you perfect children," Lvov said to the two handsomeboys who came in, and after bowing to Levin, went up to their father,obviously wishing to ask him about something.
Levin would have liked to talk to them, to hear what they would say totheir father, but Natalia began talking to him, and then Lvov’scolleague in the service, Mahotin, walked in, wearing his court uniform,to go with him to meet someone, and a conversation was kept up without abreak upon Herzegovina, Princess Korzinskaya, the town council, and thesudden death of Madame Apraksina.
Levin even forgot the commission intrusted to him. He recollected it ashe was going into the hall.
"Oh, Kitty told me to talk to you about Oblonsky," he said, as Lvov wasstanding on the stairs, seeing his wife and Levin off.
"Yes, yes, maman wants us, _les beaux-frères,_ to attack him," he said,blushing. "But why should I?"
"Well, then, I will attack him," said Madame Lvova, with a smile,standing in her white sheepskin cape, waiting till they had finishedspeaking. "Come, let us go."


Chapter 5

At the concert in the afternoon two very interesting things wereperformed. One was a fantasia, _King Lear;_ the other was a quartettededicated to the memory of Bach. Both were new and in the new style, andLevin was eager to form an opinion of them. After escorting hissister-in-law to her stall, he stood against a column and tried tolisten as attentively and conscientiously as possible. He tried not tolet his attention be distracted, and not to spoil his impression bylooking at the conductor in a white tie, waving his arms, which alwaysdisturbed his enjoyment of music so much, or the ladies in bonnets, withstrings carefully tied over their ears, and all these people eitherthinking of nothing at all or thinking of all sorts of things except themusic. He tried to avoid meeting musical connoisseurs or talkativeacquaintances, and stood looking at the floor straight before him,listening.
But the more he listened to the fantasia of King Lear the further hefelt from forming any definite opinion of it. There was, as it were, acontinual beginning, a preparation of the musical expression of somefeeling, but it fell to pieces again directly, breaking into new musicalmotives, or simply nothing but the whims of the composer, exceedinglycomplex but disconnected sounds. And these fragmentary musicalexpressions, though sometimes beautiful, were disagreeable, because theywere utterly unexpected and not led up to by anything. Gaiety and griefand despair and tenderness and triumph followed one another without anyconnection, like the emotions of a madman. And those emotions, like amadman’s, sprang up quite unexpectedly.
During the whole of the performance Levin felt like a deaf man watchingpeople dancing, and was in a state of complete bewilderment when thefantasia was over, and felt a great weariness from the fruitless strainon his attention. Loud applause resounded on all sides. Everyone got up,moved about, and began talking. Anxious to throw some light on his ownperplexity from the impressions of others, Levin began to walk about,looking for connoisseurs, and was glad to see a well-known musicalamateur in conversation with Pestsov, whom he knew.
"Marvelous!" Pestsov was saying in his mellow bass. "How are you,Konstantin Dmitrievitch? Particularly sculpturesque and plastic, so tosay, and richly colored is that passage where you feel Cordelia’sapproach, where woman, _das ewig Weibliche,_ enters into conflict withfate. Isn’t it?"
"You mean ... what has Cordelia to do with it?" Levin asked timidly,forgetting that the fantasia was supposed to represent King Lear.
"Cordelia comes in ... see here!" said Pestsov, tapping his finger onthe satiny surface of the program he held in his hand and passing it toLevin.
Only then Levin recollected the title of the fantasia, and made haste toread in the Russian translation the lines from Shakespeare that wereprinted on the back of the program.
"You can’t follow it without that," said Pestsov, addressing Levin, asthe person he had been speaking to had gone away, and he had no one totalk to.
In the _entr’acte_ Levin and Pestsov fell into an argument upon themerits and defects of music of the Wagner school. Levin maintained thatthe mistake of Wagner and all his followers lay in their trying to takemusic into the sphere of another art, just as poetry goes wrong when ittries to paint a face as the art of painting ought to do, and as aninstance of this mistake he cited the sculptor who carved in marblecertain poetic phantasms flitting round the figure of the poet on thepedestal. "These phantoms were so far from being phantoms that they werepositively clinging on the ladder," said Levin. The comparison pleasedhim, but he could not remember whether he had not used the same phrasebefore, and to Pestsov, too, and as he said it he felt confused.
Pestsov maintained that art is one, and that it can attain its highestmanifestations only by conjunction with all kinds of art.
The second piece that was performed Levin could not hear. Pestsov, whowas standing beside him, was talking to him almost all the time,condemning the music for its excessive affected assumption ofsimplicity, and comparing it with the simplicity of the Pre-Raphaelitesin painting. As he went out Levin met many more acquaintances, with whomhe talked of politics, of music, and of common acquaintances. Amongothers he met Count Bol, whom he had utterly forgotten to call upon.
"Well, go at once then," Madame Lvova said, when he told her; "perhapsthey’ll not be at home, and then you can come to the meeting to fetchme. You’ll find me still there."


Chapter 6

"Perhaps they’re not at home?" said Levin, as he went into the hall ofCountess Bola’s house.
"At home; please walk in," said the porter, resolutely removing hisovercoat.
"How annoying!" thought Levin with a sigh, taking off one glove andstroking his hat. "What did I come for? What have I to say to them?"
As he passed through the first drawing room Levin met in the doorwayCountess Bola, giving some order to a servant with a care-worn andsevere face. On seeing Levin she smiled, and asked him to come into thelittle drawing room, where he heard voices. In this room there weresitting in armchairs the two daughters of the countess, and a Moscowcolonel, whom Levin knew. Levin went up, greeted them, and sat downbeside the sofa with his hat on his knees.
"How is your wife? Have you been at the concert? We couldn’t go. Mammahad to be at the funeral service."
"Yes, I heard.... What a sudden death!" said Levin.
The countess came in, sat down on the sofa, and she too asked after hiswife and inquired about the concert.
Levin answered, and repeated an inquiry about Madame Apraksina’s suddendeath.
"But she was always in weak health."
"Were you at the opera yesterday?"
"Yes, I was."
"Lucca was very good."
"Yes, very good," he said, and as it was utterly of no consequence tohim what they thought of him, he began repeating what they had heard ahundred times about the characteristics of the singer’s talent. CountessBola pretended to be listening. Then, when he had said enough andpaused, the colonel, who had been silent till then, began to talk. Thecolonel too talked of the opera, and about culture. At last, afterspeaking of the proposed _folle journée_ at Turin’s, the colonellaughed, got up noisily, and went away. Levin too rose, but he saw bythe face of the countess that it was not yet time for him to go. He muststay two minutes longer. He sat down.
But as he was thinking all the while how stupid it was, he could notfind a subject for conversation, and sat silent.
"You are not going to the public meeting? They say it will be veryinteresting," began the countess.
"No, I promised my _belle-soeur_ to fetch her from it," said Levin.
A silence followed. The mother once more exchanged glances with adaughter.
"Well, now I think the time has come," thought Levin, and he got up. Theladies shook hands with him, and begged him to say _mille choses_ to hiswife for them.
The porter asked him, as he gave him his coat, "Where is your honorstaying?" and immediately wrote down his address in a big handsomelybound book.
"Of course I don’t care, but still I feel ashamed and awfully stupid,"thought Levin, consoling himself with the reflection that everyone doesit. He drove to the public meeting, where he was to find hissister-in-law, so as to drive home with her.
At the public meeting of the committee there were a great many people,and almost all the highest society. Levin was in time for the reportwhich, as everyone said, was very interesting. When the reading of thereport was over, people moved about, and Levin met Sviazhsky, whoinvited him very pressingly to come that evening to a meeting of theSociety of Agriculture, where a celebrated lecture was to be delivered,and Stepan Arkadyevitch, who had only just come from the races, and manyother acquaintances; and Levin heard and uttered various criticisms onthe meeting, on the new fantasia, and on a public trial. But, probablyfrom the mental fatigue he was beginning to feel, he made a blunder inspeaking of the trial, and this blunder he recalled several times withvexation. Speaking of the sentence upon a foreigner who had beencondemned in Russia, and of how unfair it would be to punish him byexile abroad, Levin repeated what he had heard the day before inconversation from an acquaintance.
"I think sending him abroad is much the same as punishing a carp byputting it into the water," said Levin. Then he recollected that thisidea, which he had heard from an acquaintance and uttered as his own,came from a fable of Krilov’s, and that the acquaintance had picked itup from a newspaper article.
After driving home with his sister-in-law, and finding Kitty in goodspirits and quite well, Levin drove to the club.


Chapter 7

Levin reached the club just at the right time. Members and visitors weredriving up as he arrived. Levin had not been at the club for a very longwhile—not since he lived in Moscow, when he was leaving the universityand going into society. He remembered the club, the external details ofits arrangement, but he had completely forgotten the impression it hadmade on him in old days. But as soon as, driving into the widesemicircular court and getting out of the sledge, he mounted the steps,and the hall porter, adorned with a crossway scarf, noiselessly openedthe door to him with a bow; as soon as he saw in the porter’s room thecloaks and galoshes of members who thought it less trouble to take themoff downstairs; as soon as he heard the mysterious ringing bell thatpreceded him as he ascended the easy, carpeted staircase, and saw thestatue on the landing, and the third porter at the top doors, a familiarfigure grown older, in the club livery, opening the door without hasteor delay, and scanning the visitors as they passed in—Levin felt the oldimpression of the club come back in a rush, an impression of repose,comfort, and propriety.
"Your hat, please," the porter said to Levin, who forgot the club ruleto leave his hat in the porter’s room. "Long time since you’ve been. Theprince put your name down yesterday. Prince Stepan Arkadyevitch is nothere yet."
The porter did not only know Levin, but also all his ties andrelationships, and so immediately mentioned his intimate friends.
Passing through the outer hall, divided up by screens, and the roompartitioned on the right, where a man sits at the fruit buffet, Levinovertook an old man walking slowly in, and entered the dining room fullof noise and people.
He walked along the tables, almost all full, and looked at the visitors.He saw people of all sorts, old and young; some he knew a little, someintimate friends. There was not a single cross or worried-looking face.All seemed to have left their cares and anxieties in the porter’s roomwith their hats, and were all deliberately getting ready to enjoy thematerial blessings of life. Sviazhsky was here and Shtcherbatsky,Nevyedovsky and the old prince, and Vronsky and Sergey Ivanovitch.
"Ah! why are you late?" the prince said smiling, and giving him his handover his own shoulder. "How’s Kitty?" he added, smoothing out the napkinhe had tucked in at his waistcoat buttons.
"All right; they are dining at home, all the three of them."
"Ah, ‘Aline-Nadine,’ to be sure! There’s no room with us. Go to thattable, and make haste and take a seat," said the prince, and turningaway he carefully took a plate of eel soup.
"Levin, this way!" a good-natured voice shouted a little farther on. Itwas Turovtsin. He was sitting with a young officer, and beside them weretwo chairs turned upside down. Levin gladly went up to them. He hadalways liked the good-hearted rake, Turovtsin—he was associated in hismind with memories of his courtship—and at that moment, after the strainof intellectual conversation, the sight of Turovtsin’s good-natured facewas particularly welcome.
"For you and Oblonsky. He’ll be here directly."
The young man, holding himself very erect, with eyes forever twinklingwith enjoyment, was an officer from Petersburg, Gagin. Turovtsinintroduced them.
"Oblonsky’s always late."
"Ah, here he is!"
"Have you only just come?" said Oblonsky, coming quickly towards them."Good day. Had some vodka? Well, come along then."
Levin got up and went with him to the big table spread with spirits andappetizers of the most various kinds. One would have thought that out oftwo dozen delicacies one might find something to one’s taste, but StepanArkadyevitch asked for something special, and one of the liveriedwaiters standing by immediately brought what was required. They drank awine glassful and returned to their table.
At once, while they were still at the soup, Gagin was served withchampagne, and told the waiter to fill four glasses. Levin did notrefuse the wine, and asked for a second bottle. He was very hungry, andate and drank with great enjoyment, and with still greater enjoymenttook part in the lively and simple conversation of his companions.Gagin, dropping his voice, told the last good story from Petersburg, andthe story, though improper and stupid, was so ludicrous that Levin brokeinto roars of laughter so loud that those near looked round.
"That’s in the same style as, ‘that’s a thing I can’t endure!’ You knowthe story?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "Ah, that’s exquisite! Anotherbottle," he said to the waiter, and he began to relate his good story.
"Pyotr Illyitch Vinovsky invites you to drink with him," a little oldwaiter interrupted Stepan Arkadyevitch, bringing two delicate glasses ofsparkling champagne, and addressing Stepan Arkadyevitch and Levin.Stepan Arkadyevitch took the glass, and looking towards a bald man withred mustaches at the other end of the table, he nodded to him, smiling.
"Who’s that?" asked Levin.
"You met him once at my place, don’t you remember? A good-naturedfellow."
Levin did the same as Stepan Arkadyevitch and took the glass.
Stepan Arkadyevitch’s anecdote too was very amusing. Levin told hisstory, and that too was successful. Then they talked of horses, of theraces, of what they had been doing that day, and of how smartlyVronsky’s Atlas had won the first prize. Levin did not notice how thetime passed at dinner.
"Ah! and here they are!" Stepan Arkadyevitch said towards the end ofdinner, leaning over the back of his chair and holding out his hand toVronsky, who came up with a tall officer of the Guards. Vronsky’s facetoo beamed with the look of good-humored enjoyment that was general inthe club. He propped his elbow playfully on Stepan Arkadyevitch’sshoulder, whispering something to him, and he held out his hand to Levinwith the same good-humored smile.
"Very glad to meet you," he said. "I looked out for you at the election,but I was told you had gone away."
"Yes, I left the same day. We’ve just been talking of your horse. Icongratulate you," said Levin. "It was very rapidly run."
"Yes; you’ve race horses too, haven’t you?"
"No, my father had; but I remember and know something about it."
"Where have you dined?" asked Stepan Arkadyevitch.
"We were at the second table, behind the columns."
"We’ve been celebrating his success," said the tall colonel. "It’s hissecond Imperial prize. I wish I might have the luck at cards he has withhorses. Well, why waste the precious time? I’m going to the ‘infernalregions,’" added the colonel, and he walked away.
"That’s Yashvin," Vronsky said in answer to Turovtsin, and he sat downin the vacated seat beside them. He drank the glass offered him, andordered a bottle of wine. Under the influence of the club atmosphere orthe wine he had drunk, Levin chatted away to Vronsky of the best breedsof cattle, and was very glad not to feel the slightest hostility to thisman. He even told him, among other things, that he had heard from hiswife that she had met him at Princess Marya Borissovna’s.
"Ah, Princess Marya Borissovna, she’s exquisite!" said StepanArkadyevitch, and he told an anecdote about her which set them alllaughing. Vronsky particularly laughed with such simplehearted amusementthat Levin felt quite reconciled to him.
"Well, have we finished?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, getting up with asmile. "Let us go."


Chapter 8

Getting up from the table, Levin walked with Gagin through the loftyroom to the billiard room, feeling his arms swing as he walked with apeculiar lightness and ease. As he crossed the big room, he came uponhis father-in-law.
"Well, how do you like our Temple of Indolence?" said the prince, takinghis arm. "Come along, come along!"
"Yes, I wanted to walk about and look at everything. It’s interesting."
"Yes, it’s interesting for you. But its interest for me is quitedifferent. You look at those little old men now," he said, pointing to aclub member with bent back and projecting lip, shuffling towards them inhis soft boots, "and imagine that they were _shlupiks_ like that fromtheir birth up."
"How _shlupiks_?"
"I see you don’t know that name. That’s our club designation. You knowthe game of rolling eggs: when one’s rolled a long while it becomes a_shlupik_. So it is with us; one goes on coming and coming to the club,and ends by becoming a _shlupik_. Ah, you laugh! but we look out, forfear of dropping into it ourselves. You know Prince Tchetchensky?"inquired the prince; and Levin saw by his face that he was just going torelate something funny.
"No, I don’t know him."
"You don’t say so! Well, Prince Tchetchensky is a well-known figure. Nomatter, though. He’s always playing billiards here. Only three years agohe was not a _shlupik_ and kept up his spirits and even used to callother people _shlupiks_. But one day he turns up, and our porter ... youknow Vassily? Why, that fat one; he’s famous for his _bon mots_. And soPrince Tchetchensky asks him, ‘Come, Vassily, who’s here? Any _shlupiks_here yet?’ And he says, ‘You’re the third.’ Yes, my dear boy, that hedid!"
Talking and greeting the friends they met, Levin and the prince walkedthrough all the rooms: the great room where tables had already been set,and the usual partners were playing for small stakes; the divan room,where they were playing chess, and Sergey Ivanovitch was sitting talkingto somebody; the billiard room, where, about a sofa in a recess, therewas a lively party drinking champagne—Gagin was one of them. They peepedinto the "infernal regions," where a good many men were crowding roundone table, at which Yashvin was sitting. Trying not to make a noise,they walked into the dark reading room, where under the shaded lampsthere sat a young man with a wrathful countenance, turning over onejournal after another, and a bald general buried in a book. They went,too, into what the prince called the intellectual room, where threegentlemen were engaged in a heated discussion of the latest politicalnews.
"Prince, please come, we’re ready," said one of his card party, who hadcome to look for him, and the prince went off. Levin sat down andlistened, but recalling all the conversation of the morning he felt allof a sudden fearfully bored. He got up hurriedly, and went to look forOblonsky and Turovtsin, with whom it had been so pleasant.
Turovtsin was one of the circle drinking in the billiard room, andStepan Arkadyevitch was talking with Vronsky near the door at thefarther corner of the room.
"It’s not that she’s dull; but this undefined, this unsettled position,"Levin caught, and he was hurrying away, but Stepan Arkadyevitch calledto him.
"Levin," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, and Levin noticed that his eyes werenot full of tears exactly, but moist, which always happened when he hadbeen drinking, or when he was touched. Just now it was due to bothcauses. "Levin, don’t go," he said, and he warmly squeezed his arm abovethe elbow, obviously not at all wishing to let him go.
"This is a true friend of mine—almost my greatest friend," he said toVronsky. "You have become even closer and dearer to me. And I want you,and I know you ought, to be friends, and great friends, because you’reboth splendid fellows."
"Well, there’s nothing for us now but to kiss and be friends," Vronskysaid, with good-natured playfulness, holding out his hand.
Levin quickly took the offered hand, and pressed it warmly.
"I’m very, very glad," said Levin.
"Waiter, a bottle of champagne," said Stepan Arkadyevitch.
"And I’m very glad," said Vronsky.
But in spite of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s desire, and their own desire, theyhad nothing to talk about, and both felt it.
"Do you know, he has never met Anna?" Stepan Arkadyevitch said toVronsky. "And I want above everything to take him to see her. Let us go,Levin!"
"Really?" said Vronsky. "She will be very glad to see you. I should begoing home at once," he added, "but I’m worried about Yashvin, and Iwant to stay on till he finishes."
"Why, is he losing?"
"He keeps losing, and I’m the only friend that can restrain him."
"Well, what do you say to pyramids? Levin, will you play? Capital!" saidStepan Arkadyevitch. "Get the table ready," he said to the marker.
"It has been ready a long while," answered the marker, who had alreadyset the balls in a triangle, and was knocking the red one about for hisown diversion.
"Well, let us begin."
After the game Vronsky and Levin sat down at Gagin’s table, and atStepan Arkadyevitch’s suggestion Levin took a hand in the game.
Vronsky sat down at the table, surrounded by friends, who wereincessantly coming up to him. Every now and then he went to the"infernal" to keep an eye on Yashvin. Levin was enjoying a delightfulsense of repose after the mental fatigue of the morning. He was gladthat all hostility was at an end with Vronsky, and the sense of peace,decorum, and comfort never left him.
When the game was over, Stepan Arkadyevitch took Levin’s arm.
"Well, let us go to Anna’s, then. At once? Eh? She is at home. Ipromised her long ago to bring you. Where were you meaning to spend theevening?"
"Oh, nowhere specially. I promised Sviazhsky to go to the Society ofAgriculture. By all means, let us go," said Levin.
"Very good; come along. Find out if my carriage is here," StepanArkadyevitch said to the waiter.
Levin went up to the table, paid the forty roubles he had lost; paid hisbill, the amount of which was in some mysterious way ascertained by thelittle old waiter who stood at the counter, and swinging his arms hewalked through all the rooms to the way out.


Chapter 9

"Oblonsky’s carriage!" the porter shouted in an angry bass. The carriagedrove up and both got in. It was only for the first few moments, whilethe carriage was driving out of the clubhouse gates, that Levin wasstill under the influence of the club atmosphere of repose, comfort, andunimpeachable good form. But as soon as the carriage drove out into thestreet, and he felt it jolting over the uneven road, heard the angryshout of a sledge driver coming towards them, saw in the uncertain lightthe red blind of a tavern and the shops, this impression was dissipated,and he began to think over his actions, and to wonder whether he wasdoing right in going to see Anna. What would Kitty say? But StepanArkadyevitch gave him no time for reflection, and, as though divininghis doubts, he scattered them.
"How glad I am," he said, "that you should know her! You know Dolly haslong wished for it. And Lvov’s been to see her, and often goes. Thoughshe is my sister," Stepan Arkadyevitch pursued, "I don’t hesitate to saythat she’s a remarkable woman. But you will see. Her position is verypainful, especially now."
"Why especially now?"
"We are carrying on negotiations with her husband about a divorce. Andhe’s agreed; but there are difficulties in regard to the son, and thebusiness, which ought to have been arranged long ago, has been draggingon for three months past. As soon as the divorce is over, she will marryVronsky. How stupid these old ceremonies are, that no one believes in,and which only prevent people being comfortable!" Stepan Arkadyevitchput in. "Well, then their position will be as regular as mine, asyours."
"What is the difficulty?" said Levin.
"Oh, it’s a long and tedious story! The whole business is in such ananomalous position with us. But the point is she has been for threemonths in Moscow, where everyone knows her, waiting for the divorce; shegoes out nowhere, sees no woman except Dolly, because, do youunderstand, she doesn’t care to have people come as a favor. That foolPrincess Varvara, even she has left her, considering this a breach ofpropriety. Well, you see, in such a position any other woman would nothave found resources in herself. But you’ll see how she has arranged herlife—how calm, how dignified she is. To the left, in the crescentopposite the church!" shouted Stepan Arkadyevitch, leaning out of thewindow. "Phew! how hot it is!" he said, in spite of twelve degrees offrost, flinging his open overcoat still wider open.
"But she has a daughter: no doubt she’s busy looking after her?" saidLevin.
"I believe you picture every woman simply as a female, _une couveuse,_"said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "If she’s occupied, it must be with herchildren. No, she brings her up capitally, I believe, but one doesn’thear about her. She’s busy, in the first place, with what she writes. Isee you’re smiling ironically, but you’re wrong. She’s writing achildren’s book, and doesn’t talk about it to anyone, but she read it tome and I gave the manuscript to Vorkuev ... you know the publisher ...and he’s an author himself too, I fancy. He understands those things,and he says it’s a remarkable piece of work. But are you fancying she’san authoress?—not a bit of it. She’s a woman with a heart, beforeeverything, but you’ll see. Now she has a little English girl with her,and a whole family she’s looking after."
"Oh, something in a philanthropic way?"
"Why, you will look at everything in the worst light. It’s not fromphilanthropy, it’s from the heart. They—that is, Vronsky—had a trainer,an Englishman, first-rate in his own line, but a drunkard. He’scompletely given up to drink—delirium tremens—and the family were caston the world. She saw them, helped them, got more and more interested inthem, and now the whole family is on her hands. But not by way ofpatronage, you know, helping with money; she’s herself preparing theboys in Russian for the high school, and she’s taken the little girl tolive with her. But you’ll see her for yourself."
The carriage drove into the courtyard, and Stepan Arkadyevitch rangloudly at the entrance where sledges were standing.
And without asking the servant who opened the door whether the lady wereat home, Stepan Arkadyevitch walked into the hall. Levin followed him,more and more doubtful whether he was doing right or wrong.
Looking at himself in the glass, Levin noticed that he was red in theface, but he felt certain he was not drunk, and he followed StepanArkadyevitch up the carpeted stairs. At the top Stepan Arkadyevitchinquired of the footman, who bowed to him as to an intimate friend, whowas with Anna Arkadyevna, and received the answer that it was M.Vorkuev.
"Where are they?"
"In the study."
Passing through the dining room, a room not very large, with dark,paneled walls, Stepan Arkadyevitch and Levin walked over the soft carpetto the half-dark study, lighted up by a single lamp with a big darkshade. Another lamp with a reflector was hanging on the wall, lightingup a big full-length portrait of a woman, which Levin could not helplooking at. It was the portrait of Anna, painted in Italy by Mihailov.While Stepan Arkadyevitch went behind the _treillage_, and the man’svoice which had been speaking paused, Levin gazed at the portrait, whichstood out from the frame in the brilliant light thrown on it, and hecould not tear himself away from it. He positively forgot where he was,and not even hearing what was said, he could not take his eyes off themarvelous portrait. It was not a picture, but a living, charming woman,with black curling hair, with bare arms and shoulders, with a pensivesmile on the lips, covered with soft down; triumphantly and softly shelooked at him with eyes that baffled him. She was not living onlybecause she was more beautiful than a living woman can be.
"I am delighted!" He heard suddenly near him a voice, unmistakablyaddressing him, the voice of the very woman he had been admiring in theportrait. Anna had come from behind the treillage to meet him, and Levinsaw in the dim light of the study the very woman of the portrait, in adark blue shot gown, not in the same position nor with the sameexpression, but with the same perfection of beauty which the artist hadcaught in the portrait. She was less dazzling in reality, but, on theother hand, there was something fresh and seductive in the living womanwhich was not in the portrait.


Chapter 10

She had risen to meet him, not concealing her pleasure at seeing him;and in the quiet ease with which she held out her little vigorous hand,introduced him to Vorkuev and indicated a red-haired, pretty little girlwho was sitting at work, calling her her pupil, Levin recognized andliked the manners of a woman of the great world, always self-possessedand natural.
"I am delighted, delighted," she repeated, and on her lips these simplewords took for Levin’s ears a special significance. "I have known youand liked you for a long while, both from your friendship with Stiva andfor your wife’s sake.... I knew her for a very short time, but she lefton me the impression of an exquisite flower, simply a flower. And tothink she will soon be a mother!"
She spoke easily and without haste, looking now and then from Levin toher brother, and Levin felt that the impression he was making was good,and he felt immediately at home, simple and happy with her, as though hehad known her from childhood.
"Ivan Petrovitch and I settled in Alexey’s study," she said in answer toStepan Arkadyevitch’s question whether he might smoke, "just so as to beable to smoke"—and glancing at Levin, instead of asking whether he wouldsmoke, she pulled closer a tortoise-shell cigar-case and took acigarette.
"How are you feeling today?" her brother asked her.
"Oh, nothing. Nerves, as usual."
"Yes, isn’t it extraordinarily fine?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, noticingthat Levin was scrutinizing the picture.
"I have never seen a better portrait."
"And extraordinarily like, isn’t it?" said Vorkuev.
Levin looked from the portrait to the original. A peculiar brilliancelighted up Anna’s face when she felt his eyes on her. Levin flushed, andto cover his confusion would have asked whether she had seen DaryaAlexandrovna lately; but at that moment Anna spoke. "We were justtalking, Ivan Petrovitch and I, of Vashtchenkov’s last pictures. Haveyou seen them?"
"Yes, I have seen them," answered Levin.
"But, I beg your pardon, I interrupted you ... you were saying?..."
Levin asked if she had seen Dolly lately.
"She was here yesterday. She was very indignant with the high schoolpeople on Grisha’s account. The Latin teacher, it seems, had been unfairto him."
"Yes, I have seen his pictures. I didn’t care for them very much," Levinwent back to the subject she had started.
Levin talked now not at all with that purely businesslike attitude tothe subject with which he had been talking all the morning. Every wordin his conversation with her had a special significance. And talking toher was pleasant; still pleasanter it was to listen to her.
Anna talked not merely naturally and cleverly, but cleverly andcarelessly, attaching no value to her own ideas and giving great weightto the ideas of the person she was talking to.
The conversation turned on the new movement in art, on the newillustrations of the Bible by a French artist. Vorkuev attacked theartist for a realism carried to the point of coarseness.
Levin said that the French had carried conventionality further thananyone, and that consequently they see a great merit in the return torealism. In the fact of not lying they see poetry.
Never had anything clever said by Levin given him so much pleasure asthis remark. Anna’s face lighted up at once, as at once she appreciatedthe thought. She laughed.
"I laugh," she said, "as one laughs when one sees a very true portrait.What you said so perfectly hits off French art now, painting andliterature too, indeed—Zola, Daudet. But perhaps it is always so, thatmen form their conceptions from fictitious, conventional types, andthen—all the _combinaisons_ made—they are tired of the fictitiousfigures and begin to invent more natural, true figures."
"That’s perfectly true," said Vorknev.
"So you’ve been at the club?" she said to her brother.
"Yes, yes, this is a woman!" Levin thought, forgetting himself andstaring persistently at her lovely, mobile face, which at that momentwas all at once completely transformed. Levin did not hear what she wastalking of as she leaned over to her brother, but he was struck by thechange of her expression. Her face—so handsome a moment before in itsrepose—suddenly wore a look of strange curiosity, anger, and pride. Butthis lasted only an instant. She dropped her eyelids, as thoughrecollecting something.
"Oh, well, but that’s of no interest to anyone," she said, and sheturned to the English girl.
"Please order the tea in the drawing room," she said in English.
The girl got up and went out.
"Well, how did she get through her examination?" asked StepanArkadyevitch.
"Splendidly! She’s a very gifted child and a sweet character."
"It will end in your loving her more than your own."
"There a man speaks. In love there’s no more nor less. I love mydaughter with one love, and her with another."
"I was just telling Anna Arkadyevna," said Vorkuev, "that if she were toput a hundredth part of the energy she devotes to this English girl tothe public question of the education of Russian children, she would bedoing a great and useful work."
"Yes, but I can’t help it; I couldn’t do it. Count Alexey Kirillovitchurged me very much" (as she uttered the words _Count AlexeyKirillovitch_ she glanced with appealing timidity at Levin, and heunconsciously responded with a respectful and reassuring look); "heurged me to take up the school in the village. I visited it severaltimes. The children were very nice, but I could not feel drawn to thework. You speak of energy. Energy rests upon love; and come as it will,there’s no forcing it. I took to this child—I could not myself say why."
And she glanced again at Levin. And her smile and her glance—all toldhim that it was to him only she was addressing her words, valuing hisgood opinion, and at the same time sure beforehand that they understoodeach other.
"I quite understand that," Levin answered. "It’s impossible to giveone’s heart to a school or such institutions in general, and I believethat’s just why philanthropic institutions always give such poorresults."
She was silent for a while, then she smiled.
"Yes, yes," she agreed; "I never could. _Je n’ai pas le coeur assez_large to love a whole asylum of horrid little girls. _Cela ne m’a jamaisréussi._ There are so many women who have made themselves _une positionsociale_ in that way. And now more than ever," she said with a mournful,confiding expression, ostensibly addressing her brother, butunmistakably intending her words only for Levin, "now when I have suchneed of some occupation, I cannot." And suddenly frowning (Levin sawthat she was frowning at herself for talking about herself) she changedthe subject. "I know about you," she said to Levin; "that you’re not apublic-spirited citizen, and I have defended you to the best of myability."
"How have you defended me?"
"Oh, according to the attacks made on you. But won’t you have some tea?"She rose and took up a book bound in morocco.
"Give it to me, Anna Arkadyevna," said Vorkuev, indicating the book."It’s well worth taking up."
"Oh, no, it’s all so sketchy."
"I told him about it," Stepan Arkadyevitch said to his sister, noddingat Levin.
"You shouldn’t have. My writing is something after the fashion of thoselittle baskets and carving which Liza Mertsalova used to sell me fromthe prisons. She had the direction of the prison department in thatsociety," she turned to Levin; "and they were miracles of patience, thework of those poor wretches."
And Levin saw a new trait in this woman, who attracted him soextraordinarily. Besides wit, grace, and beauty, she had truth. She hadno wish to hide from him all the bitterness of her position. As she saidthat she sighed, and her face suddenly taking a hard expression, lookedas it were turned to stone. With that expression on her face she wasmore beautiful than ever; but the expression was new; it was utterlyunlike that expression, radiant with happiness and creating happiness,which had been caught by the painter in her portrait. Levin looked morethan once at the portrait and at her figure, as taking her brother’s armshe walked with him to the high doors and he felt for her a tendernessand pity at which he wondered himself.
She asked Levin and Vorkuev to go into the drawing room, while shestayed behind to say a few words to her brother. "About her divorce,about Vronsky, and what he’s doing at the club, about me?" wonderedLevin. And he was so keenly interested by the question of what she wassaying to Stepan Arkadyevitch, that he scarcely heard what Vorkuev wastelling him of the qualities of the story for children Anna Arkadyevnahad written.
At tea the same pleasant sort of talk, full of interesting matter,continued. There was not a single instant when a subject forconversation was to seek; on the contrary, it was felt that one hadhardly time to say what one had to say, and eagerly held back to hearwhat the others were saying. And all that was said, not only by her, butby Vorkuev and Stepan Arkadyevitch—all, so it seemed to Levin, gainedpeculiar significance from her appreciation and her criticism. While hefollowed this interesting conversation, Levin was all the time admiringher—her beauty, her intelligence, her culture, and at the same time herdirectness and genuine depth of feeling. He listened and talked, and allthe while he was thinking of her inner life, trying to divine herfeelings. And though he had judged her so severely hitherto, now by somestrange chain of reasoning he was justifying her and was also sorry forher, and afraid that Vronsky did not fully understand her. At eleveno’clock, when Stepan Arkadyevitch got up to go (Vorkuev had leftearlier), it seemed to Levin that he had only just come. RegretfullyLevin too rose.
"Good-bye," she said, holding his hand and glancing into his face with awinning look. "I am very glad _que la glace est rompue._"
She dropped his hand, and half closed her eyes.
"Tell your wife that I love her as before, and that if she cannot pardonme my position, then my wish for her is that she may never pardon it. Topardon it, one must go through what I have gone through, and may Godspare her that."
"Certainly, yes, I will tell her..." Levin said, blushing.


Chapter 11

"What a marvelous, sweet and unhappy woman!" he was thinking, as hestepped out into the frosty air with Stepan Arkadyevitch.
"Well, didn’t I tell you?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, seeing that Levinhad been completely won over.
"Yes," said Levin dreamily, "an extraordinary woman! It’s not hercleverness, but she has such wonderful depth of feeling. I’m awfullysorry for her!"
"Now, please God, everything will soon be settled. Well, well, don’t behard on people in future," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, opening thecarriage door. "Good-bye; we don’t go the same way."
Still thinking of Anna, of everything, even the simplest phrase in theirconversation with her, and recalling the minutest changes in herexpression, entering more and more into her position, and feelingsympathy for her, Levin reached home.
At home Kouzma told Levin that Katerina Alexandrovna was quite well, andthat her sisters had not long been gone, and he handed him two letters.Levin read them at once in the hall, that he might not over look themlater. One was from Sokolov, his bailiff. Sokolov wrote that the corncould not be sold, that it was fetching only five and a half roubles,and that more than that could not be got for it. The other letter wasfrom his sister. She scolded him for her business being still unsettled.
"Well, we must sell it at five and a half if we can’t get more," Levindecided the first question, which had always before seemed such aweighty one, with extraordinary facility on the spot. "It’sextraordinary how all one’s time is taken up here," he thought,considering the second letter. He felt himself to blame for not havinggot done what his sister had asked him to do for her. "Today, again,I’ve not been to the court, but today I’ve certainly not had time." Andresolving that he would not fail to do it next day, he went up to hiswife. As he went in, Levin rapidly ran through mentally the day he hadspent. All the events of the day were conversations, conversations hehad heard and taken part in. All the conversations were upon subjectswhich, if he had been alone at home, he would never have taken up, buthere they were very interesting. And all these conversations were rightenough, only in two places there was something not quite right. One waswhat he had said about the carp, the other was something not "quite thething" in the tender sympathy he was feeling for Anna.
Levin found his wife low-spirited and dull. The dinner of the threesisters had gone off very well, but then they had waited and waited forhim, all of them had felt dull, the sisters had departed, and she hadbeen left alone.
"Well, and what have you been doing?" she asked him, looking straightinto his eyes, which shone with rather a suspicious brightness. But thatshe might not prevent his telling her everything, she concealed herclose scrutiny of him, and with an approving smile listened to hisaccount of how he had spent the evening.
"Well, I’m very glad I met Vronsky. I felt quite at ease and naturalwith him. You understand, I shall try not to see him, but I’m glad thatthis awkwardness is all over," he said, and remembering that by way oftrying not to see him, he had immediately gone to call on Anna, heblushed. "We talk about the peasants drinking; I don’t know which drinksmost, the peasantry or our own class; the peasants do on holidays,but..."
But Kitty took not the slightest interest in discussing the drinkinghabits of the peasants. She saw that he blushed, and she wanted to knowwhy.
"Well, and then where did you go?"
"Stiva urged me awfully to go and see Anna Arkadyevna."
And as he said this, Levin blushed even more, and his doubts as towhether he had done right in going to see Anna were settled once forall. He knew now that he ought not to have done so.
Kitty’s eyes opened in a curious way and gleamed at Anna’s name, butcontrolling herself with an effort, she concealed her emotion anddeceived him.
"Oh!" was all she said.
"I’m sure you won’t be angry at my going. Stiva begged me to, and Dollywished it," Levin went on.
"Oh, no!" she said, but he saw in her eyes a constraint that boded himno good.
"She is a very sweet, very, very unhappy, good woman," he said, tellingher about Anna, her occupations, and what she had told him to say toher.
"Yes, of course, she is very much to be pitied," said Kitty, when he hadfinished. "Whom was your letter from?"
He told her, and believing in her calm tone, he went to change his coat.
Coming back, he found Kitty in the same easy chair. When he went up toher, she glanced at him and broke into sobs.
"What? what is it?" he asked, knowing beforehand what.
"You’re in love with that hateful woman; she has bewitched you! I saw itin your eyes. Yes, yes! What can it all lead to? You were drinking atthe club, drinking and gambling, and then you went ... to her of allpeople! No, we must go away.... I shall go away tomorrow."
It was a long while before Levin could soothe his wife. At last hesucceeded in calming her, only by confessing that a feeling of pity, inconjunction with the wine he had drunk, had been too much for him, thathe had succumbed to Anna’s artful influence, and that he would avoidher. One thing he did with more sincerity confess to was that living solong in Moscow, a life of nothing but conversation, eating and drinking,he was degenerating. They talked till three o’clock in the morning. Onlyat three o’clock were they sufficiently reconciled to be able to go tosleep.


Chapter 12

After taking leave of her guests, Anna did not sit down, but beganwalking up and down the room. She had unconsciously the whole eveningdone her utmost to arouse in Levin a feeling of love—as of late she hadfallen into doing with all young men—and she knew she had attained heraim, as far as was possible in one evening, with a married andconscientious man. She liked him indeed extremely, and, in spite of thestriking difference, from the masculine point of view, between Vronskyand Levin, as a woman she saw something they had in common, which hadmade Kitty able to love both. Yet as soon as he was out of the room, sheceased to think of him.
One thought, and one only, pursued her in different forms, and refusedto be shaken off. "If I have so much effect on others, on this man, wholoves his home and his wife, why is it _he_ is so cold to me?... notcold exactly, he loves me, I know that! But something new is drawing usapart now. Why wasn’t he here all the evening? He told Stiva to say hecould not leave Yashvin, and must watch over his play. Is Yashvin achild? But supposing it’s true. He never tells a lie. But there’ssomething else in it if it’s true. He is glad of an opportunity ofshowing me that he has other duties; I know that, I submit to that. Butwhy prove that to me? He wants to show me that his love for me is not tointerfere with his freedom. But I need no proofs, I need love. He oughtto understand all the bitterness of this life for me here in Moscow. Isthis life? I am not living, but waiting for an event, which iscontinually put off and put off. No answer again! And Stiva says hecannot go to Alexey Alexandrovitch. And I can’t write again. I can donothing, can begin nothing, can alter nothing; I hold myself in, I wait,inventing amusements for myself—the English family, writing, reading—butit’s all nothing but a sham, it’s all the same as morphine. He ought tofeel for me," she said, feeling tears of self-pity coming into her eyes.
She heard Vronsky’s abrupt ring and hurriedly dried her tears—not onlydried her tears, but sat down by a lamp and opened a book, affectingcomposure. She wanted to show him that she was displeased that he hadnot come home as he had promised—displeased only, and not on any accountto let him see her distress, and least of all, her self-pity. She mightpity herself, but he must not pity her. She did not want strife, sheblamed him for wanting to quarrel, but unconsciously put herself into anattitude of antagonism.
"Well, you’ve not been dull?" he said, eagerly and good-humoredly, goingup to her. "What a terrible passion it is—gambling!"
"No, I’ve not been dull; I’ve learned long ago not to be dull. Stiva hasbeen here and Levin."
"Yes, they meant to come and see you. Well, how did you like Levin?" hesaid, sitting down beside her.
"Very much. They have not long been gone. What was Yashvin doing?"
"He was winning—seventeen thousand. I got him away. He had reallystarted home, but he went back again, and now he’s losing."
"Then what did you stay for?" she asked, suddenly lifting her eyes tohim. The expression of her face was cold and ungracious. "You told Stivayou were staying on to get Yashvin away. And you have left him there."
The same expression of cold readiness for the conflict appeared on hisface too.
"In the first place, I did not ask him to give you any message; andsecondly, I never tell lies. But what’s the chief point, I wanted tostay, and I stayed," he said, frowning. "Anna, what is it for, why willyou?" he said after a moment’s silence, bending over towards her, and heopened his hand, hoping she would lay hers in it.
She was glad of this appeal for tenderness. But some strange force ofevil would not let her give herself up to her feelings, as though therules of warfare would not permit her to surrender.
"Of course you wanted to stay, and you stayed. You do everything youwant to. But what do you tell me that for? With what object?" she said,getting more and more excited. "Does anyone contest your rights? But youwant to be right, and you’re welcome to be right."
His hand closed, he turned away, and his face wore a still moreobstinate expression.
"For you it’s a matter of obstinacy," she said, watching him intentlyand suddenly finding the right word for that expression that irritatedher, "simply obstinacy. For you it’s a question of whether you keep theupper hand of me, while for me...." Again she felt sorry for herself,and she almost burst into tears. "If you knew what it is for me! When Ifeel as I do now that you are hostile, yes, hostile to me, if you knewwhat this means for me! If you knew how I feel on the brink of calamityat this instant, how afraid I am of myself!" And she turned away, hidingher sobs.
"But what are you talking about?" he said, horrified at her expressionof despair, and again bending over her, he took her hand and kissed it."What is it for? Do I seek amusements outside our home? Don’t I avoidthe society of women?"
"Well, yes! If that were all!" she said.
"Come, tell me what I ought to do to give you peace of mind? I am readyto do anything to make you happy," he said, touched by her expression ofdespair; "what wouldn’t I do to save you from distress of any sort, asnow, Anna!" he said.
"It’s nothing, nothing!" she said. "I don’t know myself whether it’s thesolitary life, my nerves.... Come, don’t let us talk of it. What aboutthe race? You haven’t told me!" she inquired, trying to conceal hertriumph at the victory, which had anyway been on her side.
He asked for supper, and began telling her about the races; but in histone, in his eyes, which became more and more cold, she saw that he didnot forgive her for her victory, that the feeling of obstinacy withwhich she had been struggling had asserted itself again in him. He wascolder to her than before, as though he were regretting his surrender.And she, remembering the words that had given her the victory, "how Ifeel on the brink of calamity, how afraid I am of myself," saw that thisweapon was a dangerous one, and that it could not be used a second time.And she felt that beside the love that bound them together there hadgrown up between them some evil spirit of strife, which she could notexorcise from his, and still less from her own heart.


Chapter 13

There are no conditions to which a man cannot become used, especially ifhe sees that all around him are living in the same way. Levin could nothave believed three months before that he could have gone quietly tosleep in the condition in which he was that day, that leading anaimless, irrational life, living too beyond his means, after drinking toexcess (he could not call what happened at the club anything else),forming inappropriately friendly relations with a man with whom his wifehad once been in love, and a still more inappropriate call upon a womanwho could only be called a lost woman, after being fascinated by thatwoman and causing his wife distress—he could still go quietly to sleep.But under the influence of fatigue, a sleepless night, and the wine hehad drunk, his sleep was sound and untroubled.
At five o’clock the creak of a door opening waked him. He jumped up andlooked round. Kitty was not in bed beside him. But there was a lightmoving behind the screen, and he heard her steps.
"What is it?... what is it?" he said, half-asleep. "Kitty! What is it?"
"Nothing," she said, coming from behind the screen with a candle in herhand. "I felt unwell," she said, smiling a particularly sweet andmeaning smile.
"What? has it begun?" he said in terror. "We ought to send..." andhurriedly he reached after his clothes.
"No, no," she said, smiling and holding his hand. "It’s sure to benothing. I was rather unwell, only a little. It’s all over now."
And getting into bed, she blew out the candle, lay down and was still.Though he thought her stillness suspicious, as though she were holdingher breath, and still more suspicious the expression of peculiartenderness and excitement with which, as she came from behind thescreen, she said "nothing," he was so sleepy that he fell asleep atonce. Only later he remembered the stillness of her breathing, andunderstood all that must have been passing in her sweet, precious heartwhile she lay beside him, not stirring, in anticipation of the greatestevent in a woman’s life. At seven o’clock he was waked by the touch ofher hand on his shoulder, and a gentle whisper. She seemed strugglingbetween regret at waking him, and the desire to talk to him.
"Kostya, don’t be frightened. It’s all right. But I fancy.... We oughtto send for Lizaveta Petrovna."
The candle was lighted again. She was sitting up in bed, holding someknitting, which she had been busy upon during the last few days.
"Please, don’t be frightened, it’s all right. I’m not a bit afraid," shesaid, seeing his scared face, and she pressed his hand to her bosom andthen to her lips.
He hurriedly jumped up, hardly awake, and kept his eyes fixed on her, ashe put on his dressing gown; then he stopped, still looking at her. Hehad to go, but he could not tear himself from her eyes. He thought heloved her face, knew her expression, her eyes, but never had he seen itlike this. How hateful and horrible he seemed to himself, thinking ofthe distress he had caused her yesterday. Her flushed face, fringed withsoft curling hair under her night cap, was radiant with joy and courage.
Though there was so little that was complex or artificial in Kitty’scharacter in general, Levin was struck by what was revealed now, whensuddenly all disguises were thrown off and the very kernel of her soulshone in her eyes. And in this simplicity and nakedness of her soul,she, the very woman he loved in her, was more manifest than ever. Shelooked at him, smiling; but all at once her brows twitched, she threw upher head, and going quickly up to him, clutched his hand and pressedclose up to him, breathing her hot breath upon him. She was in pain andwas, as it were, complaining to him of her suffering. And for the firstminute, from habit, it seemed to him that he was to blame. But in hereyes there was a tenderness that told him that she was far fromreproaching him, that she loved him for her sufferings. "If not I, whois to blame for it?" he thought unconsciously, seeking someoneresponsible for this suffering for him to punish; but there was no oneresponsible. She was suffering, complaining, and triumphing in hersufferings, and rejoicing in them, and loving them. He saw thatsomething sublime was being accomplished in her soul, but what? He couldnot make it out. It was beyond his understanding.
"I have sent to mamma. You go quickly to fetch Lizaveta Petrovna ...Kostya!... Nothing, it’s over."
She moved away from him and rang the bell.
"Well, go now; Pasha’s coming. I am all right."
And Levin saw with astonishment that she had taken up the knitting shehad brought in in the night and begun working at it again.
As Levin was going out of one door, he heard the maid-servant come in atthe other. He stood at the door and heard Kitty giving exact directionsto the maid, and beginning to help her move the bedstead.
He dressed, and while they were putting in his horses, as a hired sledgewas not to be seen yet, he ran again up to the bedroom, not on tiptoe,it seemed to him, but on wings. Two maid-servants were carefully movingsomething in the bedroom.
Kitty was walking about knitting rapidly and giving directions.
"I’m going for the doctor. They have sent for Lizaveta Petrovna, butI’ll go on there too. Isn’t there anything wanted? Yes, shall I go toDolly’s?"
She looked at him, obviously not hearing what he was saying.
"Yes, yes. Do go," she said quickly, frowning and waving her hand tohim.
He had just gone into the drawing room, when suddenly a plaintive moansounded from the bedroom, smothered instantly. He stood still, and for along while he could not understand.
"Yes, that is she," he said to himself, and clutching at his head he randownstairs.
"Lord have mercy on us! pardon us! aid us!" he repeated the words thatfor some reason came suddenly to his lips. And he, an unbeliever,repeated these words not with his lips only. At that instant he knewthat all his doubts, even the impossibility of believing with hisreason, of which he was aware in himself, did not in the least hinderhis turning to God. All of that now floated out of his soul like dust.To whom was he to turn if not to Him in whose hands he felt himself, hissoul, and his love?
The horse was not yet ready, but feeling a peculiar concentration of hisphysical forces and his intellect on what he had to do, he started offon foot without waiting for the horse, and told Kouzma to overtake him.
At the corner he met a night cabman driving hurriedly. In the littlesledge, wrapped in a velvet cloak, sat Lizaveta Petrovna with a kerchiefround her head. "Thank God! thank God!" he said, overjoyed to recognizeher little fair face which wore a peculiarly serious, even sternexpression. Telling the driver not to stop, he ran along beside her.
"For two hours, then? Not more?" she inquired. "You should let PyotrDmitrievitch know, but don’t hurry him. And get some opium at thechemist’s."
"So you think that it may go on well? Lord have mercy on us and helpus!" Levin said, seeing his own horse driving out of the gate. Jumpinginto the sledge beside Kouzma, he told him to drive to the doctor’s.


Chapter 14

The doctor was not yet up, and the footman said that "he had been uplate, and had given orders not to be waked, but would get up soon." Thefootman was cleaning the lamp-chimneys, and seemed very busy about them.This concentration of the footman upon his lamps, and his indifferenceto what was passing in Levin, at first astounded him, but immediately onconsidering the question he realized that no one knew or was bound toknow his feelings, and that it was all the more necessary to act calmly,sensibly, and resolutely to get through this wall of indifference andattain his aim.
"Don’t be in a hurry or let anything slip," Levin said to himself,feeling a greater and greater flow of physical energy and attention toall that lay before him to do.
Having ascertained that the doctor was not getting up, Levin consideredvarious plans, and decided on the following one: that Kouzma should gofor another doctor, while he himself should go to the chemist’s foropium, and if when he came back the doctor had not yet begun to get up,he would either by tipping the footman, or by force, wake the doctor atall hazards.
At the chemist’s the lank shopman sealed up a packet of powders for acoachman who stood waiting, and refused him opium with the samecallousness with which the doctor’s footman had cleaned his lampchimneys. Trying not to get flurried or out of temper, Levin mentionedthe names of the doctor and midwife, and explaining what the opium wasneeded for, tried to persuade him. The assistant inquired in Germanwhether he should give it, and receiving an affirmative reply frombehind the partition, he took out a bottle and a funnel, deliberatelypoured the opium from a bigger bottle into a little one, stuck on alabel, sealed it up, in spite of Levin’s request that he would not doso, and was about to wrap it up too. This was more than Levin couldstand; he took the bottle firmly out of his hands, and ran to the bigglass doors. The doctor was not even now getting up, and the footman,busy now in putting down the rugs, refused to wake him. Levindeliberately took out a ten rouble note, and, careful to speak slowly,though losing no time over the business, he handed him the note, andexplained that Pyotr Dmitrievitch (what a great and important personagehe seemed to Levin now, this Pyotr Dmitrievitch, who had been of solittle consequence in his eyes before!) had promised to come at anytime; that he would certainly not be angry! and that he must thereforewake him at once.
The footman agreed, and went upstairs, taking Levin into the waitingroom.
Levin could hear through the door the doctor coughing, moving about,washing, and saying something. Three minutes passed; it seemed to Levinthat more than an hour had gone by. He could not wait any longer.
"Pyotr Dmitrievitch, Pyotr Dmitrievitch!" he said in an imploring voiceat the open door. "For God’s sake, forgive me! See me as you are. It’sbeen going on more than two hours already."
"In a minute; in a minute!" answered a voice, and to his amazement Levinheard that the doctor was smiling as he spoke.
"For one instant."
"In a minute."
Two minutes more passed while the doctor was putting on his boots, andtwo minutes more while the doctor put on his coat and combed his hair.
"Pyotr Dmitrievitch!" Levin was beginning again in a plaintive voice,just as the doctor came in dressed and ready. "These people have noconscience," thought Levin. "Combing his hair, while we’re dying!"
"Good morning!" the doctor said to him, shaking hands, and, as it were,teasing him with his composure. "There’s no hurry. Well now?"
Trying to be as accurate as possible, Levin began to tell him everyunnecessary detail of his wife’s condition, interrupting his accountrepeatedly with entreaties that the doctor would come with him at once.
"Oh, you needn’t be in any hurry. You don’t understand, you know. I’mcertain I’m not wanted, still I’ve promised, and if you like, I’ll come.But there’s no hurry. Please sit down; won’t you have some coffee?"
Levin stared at him with eyes that asked whether he was laughing at him;but the doctor had no notion of making fun of him.
"I know, I know," the doctor said, smiling; "I’m a married man myself;and at these moments we husbands are very much to be pitied. I’ve apatient whose husband always takes refuge in the stables on suchoccasions."
"But what do you think, Pyotr Dmitrievitch? Do you suppose it may go allright?"
"Everything points to a favorable issue."
"So you’ll come immediately?" said Levin, looking wrathfully at theservant who was bringing in the coffee.
"In an hour’s time."
"Oh, for mercy’s sake!"
"Well, let me drink my coffee, anyway."
The doctor started upon his coffee. Both were silent.
"The Turks are really getting beaten, though. Did you read yesterday’stelegrams?" said the doctor, munching some roll.
"No, I can’t stand it!" said Levin, jumping up. "So you’ll be with us ina quarter of an hour."
"In half an hour."
"On your honor?"
When Levin got home, he drove up at the same time as the princess, andthey went up to the bedroom door together. The princess had tears in hereyes, and her hands were shaking. Seeing Levin, she embraced him, andburst into tears.
"Well, my dear Lizaveta Petrovna?" she queried, clasping the hand of themidwife, who came out to meet them with a beaming and anxious face.
"She’s going on well," she said; "persuade her to lie down. She will beeasier so."
From the moment when he had waked up and understood what was going on,Levin had prepared his mind to bear resolutely what was before him, andwithout considering or anticipating anything, to avoid upsetting hiswife, and on the contrary to soothe her and keep up her courage. Withoutallowing himself even to think of what was to come, of how it would end,judging from his inquiries as to the usual duration of these ordeals,Levin had in his imagination braced himself to bear up and to keep atight rein on his feelings for five hours, and it had seemed to him hecould do this. But when he came back from the doctor’s and saw hersufferings again, he fell to repeating more and more frequently: "Lord,have mercy on us, and succor us!" He sighed, and flung his head up, andbegan to feel afraid he could not bear it, that he would burst intotears or run away. Such agony it was to him. And only one hour hadpassed.
But after that hour there passed another hour, two hours, three, thefull five hours he had fixed as the furthest limit of his sufferings,and the position was still unchanged; and he was still bearing itbecause there was nothing to be done but bear it; every instant feelingthat he had reached the utmost limits of his endurance, and that hisheart would break with sympathy and pain.
But still the minutes passed by and the hours, and still hours more, andhis misery and horror grew and were more and more intense.
All the ordinary conditions of life, without which one can form noconception of anything, had ceased to exist for Levin. He lost all senseof time. Minutes—those minutes when she sent for him and he held hermoist hand, that would squeeze his hand with extraordinary violence andthen push it away—seemed to him hours, and hours seemed to him minutes.He was surprised when Lizaveta Petrovna asked him to light a candlebehind a screen, and he found that it was five o’clock in the afternoon.If he had been told it was only ten o’clock in the morning, he would nothave been more surprised. Where he was all this time, he knew as littleas the time of anything. He saw her swollen face, sometimes bewilderedand in agony, sometimes smiling and trying to reassure him. He saw theold princess too, flushed and overwrought, with her gray curls indisorder, forcing herself to gulp down her tears, biting her lips; hesaw Dolly too and the doctor, smoking fat cigarettes, and LizavetaPetrovna with a firm, resolute, reassuring face, and the old princewalking up and down the hall with a frowning face. But why they came inand went out, where they were, he did not know. The princess was withthe doctor in the bedroom, then in the study, where a table set fordinner suddenly appeared; then she was not there, but Dolly was. ThenLevin remembered he had been sent somewhere. Once he had been sent tomove a table and sofa. He had done this eagerly, thinking it had to bedone for her sake, and only later on he found it was his own bed he hadbeen getting ready. Then he had been sent to the study to ask the doctorsomething. The doctor had answered and then had said something about theirregularities in the municipal council. Then he had been sent to thebedroom to help the old princess to move the holy picture in its silverand gold setting, and with the princess’s old waiting maid he hadclambered on a shelf to reach it and had broken the little lamp, and theold servant had tried to reassure him about the lamp and about his wife,and he carried the holy picture and set it at Kitty’s head, carefullytucking it in behind the pillow. But where, when, and why all this hadhappened, he could not tell. He did not understand why the old princesstook his hand, and looking compassionately at him, begged him not toworry himself, and Dolly persuaded him to eat something and led him outof the room, and even the doctor looked seriously and with commiserationat him and offered him a drop of something.
All he knew and felt was that what was happening was what had happenednearly a year before in the hotel of the country town at the deathbed ofhis brother Nikolay. But that had been grief—this was joy. Yet thatgrief and this joy were alike outside all the ordinary conditions oflife; they were loop-holes, as it were, in that ordinary life throughwhich there came glimpses of something sublime. And in the contemplationof this sublime something the soul was exalted to inconceivable heightsof which it had before had no conception, while reason lagged behind,unable to keep up with it.
"Lord, have mercy on us, and succor us!" he repeated to himselfincessantly, feeling, in spite of his long and, as it seemed, completealienation from religion, that he turned to God just as trustfully andsimply as he had in his childhood and first youth.
All this time he had two distinct spiritual conditions. One was awayfrom her, with the doctor, who kept smoking one fat cigarette afteranother and extinguishing them on the edge of a full ash tray, withDolly, and with the old prince, where there was talk about dinner, aboutpolitics, about Marya Petrovna’s illness, and where Levin suddenlyforgot for a minute what was happening, and felt as though he had wakedup from sleep; the other was in her presence, at her pillow, where hisheart seemed breaking and still did not break from sympatheticsuffering, and he prayed to God without ceasing. And every time he wasbrought back from a moment of oblivion by a scream reaching him from thebedroom, he fell into the same strange terror that had come upon him thefirst minute. Every time he heard a shriek, he jumped up, ran to justifyhimself, remembered on the way that he was not to blame, and he longedto defend her, to help her. But as he looked at her, he saw again thathelp was impossible, and he was filled with terror and prayed: "Lord,have mercy on us, and help us!" And as time went on, both theseconditions became more intense; the calmer he became away from her,completely forgetting her, the more agonizing became both her sufferingsand his feeling of helplessness before them. He jumped up, would haveliked to run away, but ran to her.
Sometimes, when again and again she called upon him, he blamed her; butseeing her patient, smiling face, and hearing the words, "I am worryingyou," he threw the blame on God; but thinking of God, at once he fell tobeseeching God to forgive him and have mercy.


Chapter 15

He did not know whether it was late or early. The candles had all burnedout. Dolly had just been in the study and had suggested to the doctorthat he should lie down. Levin sat listening to the doctor’s stories ofa quack mesmerizer and looking at the ashes of his cigarette. There hadbeen a period of repose, and he had sunk into oblivion. He hadcompletely forgotten what was going on now. He heard the doctor’s chatand understood it. Suddenly there came an unearthly shriek. The shriekwas so awful that Levin did not even jump up, but holding his breath,gazed in terrified inquiry at the doctor. The doctor put his head on oneside, listened, and smiled approvingly. Everything was so extraordinarythat nothing could strike Levin as strange. "I suppose it must be so,"he thought, and still sat where he was. Whose scream was this? He jumpedup, ran on tiptoe to the bedroom, edged round Lizaveta Petrovna and theprincess, and took up his position at Kitty’s pillow. The scream hadsubsided, but there was some change now. What it was he did not see anddid not comprehend, and he had no wish to see or comprehend. But he sawit by the face of Lizaveta Petrovna. Lizaveta Petrovna’s face was sternand pale, and still as resolute, though her jaws were twitching, and hereyes were fixed intently on Kitty. Kitty’s swollen and agonized face, atress of hair clinging to her moist brow, was turned to him and soughthis eyes. Her lifted hands asked for his hands. Clutching his chillhands in her moist ones, she began squeezing them to her face.
"Don’t go, don’t go! I’m not afraid, I’m not afraid!" she said rapidly."Mamma, take my earrings. They bother me. You’re not afraid? Quick,quick, Lizaveta Petrovna..."
She spoke quickly, very quickly, and tried to smile. But suddenly herface was drawn, she pushed him away.
"Oh, this is awful! I’m dying, I’m dying! Go away!" she shrieked, andagain he heard that unearthly scream.
Levin clutched at his head and ran out of the room.
"It’s nothing, it’s nothing, it’s all right," Dolly called after him.
But they might say what they liked, he knew now that all was over. Hestood in the next room, his head leaning against the door post, andheard shrieks, howls such as he had never heard before, and he knew thatwhat had been Kitty was uttering these shrieks. He had long ago ceasedto wish for the child. By now he loathed this child. He did not evenwish for her life now, all he longed for was the end of this awfulanguish.
"Doctor! What is it? What is it? By God!" he said, snatching at thedoctor’s hand as he came up.
"It’s the end," said the doctor. And the doctor’s face was so grave ashe said it that Levin took _the end_ as meaning her death.
Beside himself, he ran into the bedroom. The first thing he saw was theface of Lizaveta Petrovna. It was even more frowning and stern. Kitty’sface he did not know. In the place where it had been was something thatwas fearful in its strained distortion and in the sounds that came fromit. He fell down with his head on the wooden framework of the bed,feeling that his heart was bursting. The awful scream never paused, itbecame still more awful, and as though it had reached the utmost limitof terror, suddenly it ceased. Levin could not believe his ears, butthere could be no doubt; the scream had ceased and he heard a subduedstir and bustle, and hurried breathing, and her voice, gasping, alive,tender, and blissful, uttered softly, "It’s over!"
He lifted his head. With her hands hanging exhausted on the quilt,looking extraordinarily lovely and serene, she looked at him in silenceand tried to smile, and could not.
And suddenly, from the mysterious and awful far-away world in which hehad been living for the last twenty-two hours, Levin felt himself all inan instant borne back to the old every-day world, glorified though now,by such a radiance of happiness that he could not bear it. The strainedchords snapped, sobs and tears of joy which he had never foreseen roseup with such violence that his whole body shook, that for long theyprevented him from speaking.
Falling on his knees before the bed, he held his wife’s hand before hislips and kissed it, and the hand, with a weak movement of the fingers,responded to his kiss. And meanwhile, there at the foot of the bed, inthe deft hands of Lizaveta Petrovna, like a flickering light in a lamp,lay the life of a human creature, which had never existed before, andwhich would now with the same right, with the same importance to itself,live and create in its own image.
"Alive! alive! And a boy too! Set your mind at rest!" Levin heardLizaveta Petrovna saying, as she slapped the baby’s back with a shakinghand.
"Mamma, is it true?" said Kitty’s voice.
The princess’s sobs were all the answers she could make. And in themidst of the silence there came in unmistakable reply to the mother’squestion, a voice quite unlike the subdued voices speaking in the room.It was the bold, clamorous, self-assertive squall of the new humanbeing, who had so incomprehensibly appeared.
If Levin had been told before that Kitty was dead, and that he had diedwith her, and that their children were angels, and that God was standingbefore him, he would have been surprised at nothing. But now, comingback to the world of reality, he had to make great mental efforts totake in that she was alive and well, and that the creature squalling sodesperately was his son. Kitty was alive, her agony was over. And he wasunutterably happy. That he understood; he was completely happy in it.But the baby? Whence, why, who was he?... He could not get used to theidea. It seemed to him something extraneous, superfluous, to which hecould not accustom himself.


Chapter 16

At ten o’clock the old prince, Sergey Ivanovitch, and StepanArkadyevitch were sitting at Levin’s. Having inquired after Kitty, theyhad dropped into conversation upon other subjects. Levin heard them, andunconsciously, as they talked, going over the past, over what had beenup to that morning, he thought of himself as he had been yesterday tillthat point. It was as though a hundred years had passed since then. Hefelt himself exalted to unattainable heights, from which he studiouslylowered himself so as not to wound the people he was talking to. Hetalked, and was all the time thinking of his wife, of her condition now,of his son, in whose existence he tried to school himself intobelieving. The whole world of woman, which had taken for him since hismarriage a new value he had never suspected before, was now so exaltedthat he could not take it in in his imagination. He heard them talk ofyesterday’s dinner at the club, and thought: "What is happening with hernow? Is she asleep? How is she? What is she thinking of? Is he crying,my son Dmitri?" And in the middle of the conversation, in the middle ofa sentence, he jumped up and went out of the room.
"Send me word if I can see her," said the prince.
"Very well, in a minute," answered Levin, and without stopping, he wentto her room.
She was not asleep, she was talking gently with her mother, making plansabout the christening.
Carefully set to rights, with hair well-brushed, in a smart little capwith some blue in it, her arms out on the quilt, she was lying on herback. Meeting his eyes, her eyes drew him to her. Her face, brightbefore, brightened still more as he drew near her. There was the samechange in it from earthly to unearthly that is seen in the face of thedead. But then it means farewell, here it meant welcome. Again a rush ofemotion, such as he had felt at the moment of the child’s birth, floodedhis heart. She took his hand and asked him if he had slept. He could notanswer, and turned away, struggling with his weakness.
"I have had a nap, Kostya!" she said to him; "and I am so comfortablenow."
She looked at him, but suddenly her expression changed.
"Give him to me," she said, hearing the baby’s cry. "Give him to me,Lizaveta Petrovna, and he shall look at him."
"To be sure, his papa shall look at him," said Lizaveta Petrovna,getting up and bringing something red, and queer, and wriggling. "Wait aminute, we’ll make him tidy first," and Lizaveta Petrovna laid the redwobbling thing on the bed, began untrussing and trussing up the baby,lifting it up and turning it over with one finger and powdering it withsomething.
Levin, looking at the tiny, pitiful creature, made strenuous efforts todiscover in his heart some traces of fatherly feeling for it. He feltnothing towards it but disgust. But when it was undressed and he caughta glimpse of wee, wee, little hands, little feet, saffron-colored, withlittle toes, too, and positively with a little big toe different fromthe rest, and when he saw Lizaveta Petrovna closing the wide-open littlehands, as though they were soft springs, and putting them into linengarments, such pity for the little creature came upon him, and suchterror that she would hurt it, that he held her hand back.
Lizaveta Petrovna laughed.
"Don’t be frightened, don’t be frightened!"
When the baby had been put to rights and transformed into a firm doll,Lizaveta Petrovna dandled it as though proud of her handiwork, and stooda little away so that Levin might see his son in all his glory.
Kitty looked sideways in the same direction, never taking her eyes offthe baby. "Give him to me! give him to me!" she said, and even made asthough she would sit up.
"What are you thinking of, Katerina Alexandrovna, you mustn’t move likethat! Wait a minute. I’ll give him to you. Here we’re showing papa whata fine fellow we are!"
And Lizaveta Petrovna, with one hand supporting the wobbling head,lifted up on the other arm the strange, limp, red creature, whose headwas lost in its swaddling clothes. But it had a nose, too, and slantingeyes and smacking lips.
"A splendid baby!" said Lizaveta Petrovna.
Levin sighed with mortification. This splendid baby excited in him nofeeling but disgust and compassion. It was not at all the feeling he hadlooked forward to.
He turned away while Lizaveta Petrovna put the baby to the unaccustomedbreast.
Suddenly laughter made him look round. The baby had taken the breast.
"Come, that’s enough, that’s enough!" said Lizaveta Petrovna, but Kittywould not let the baby go. He fell asleep in her arms.
"Look, now," said Kitty, turning the baby so that he could see it. Theaged-looking little face suddenly puckered up still more and the babysneezed.
Smiling, hardly able to restrain his tears, Levin kissed his wife andwent out of the dark room. What he felt towards this little creature wasutterly unlike what he had expected. There was nothing cheerful andjoyous in the feeling; on the contrary, it was a new torture ofapprehension. It was the consciousness of a new sphere of liability topain. And this sense was so painful at first, the apprehension lest thishelpless creature should suffer was so intense, that it prevented himfrom noticing the strange thrill of senseless joy and even pride that hehad felt when the baby sneezed.


Chapter 17

Stepan Arkadyevitch’s affairs were in a very bad way.
The money for two-thirds of the forest had all been spent already, andhe had borrowed from the merchant in advance at ten per cent discount,almost all the remaining third. The merchant would not give more,especially as Darya Alexandrovna, for the first time that winterinsisting on her right to her own property, had refused to sign thereceipt for the payment of the last third of the forest. All his salarywent on household expenses and in payment of petty debts that could notbe put off. There was positively no money.
This was unpleasant and awkward, and in Stepan Arkadyevitch’s opinionthings could not go on like this. The explanation of the position was,in his view, to be found in the fact that his salary was too small. Thepost he filled had been unmistakably very good five years ago, but itwas so no longer.
Petrov, the bank director, had twelve thousand; Sventitsky, a companydirector, had seventeen thousand; Mitin, who had founded a bank,received fifty thousand.
"Clearly I’ve been napping, and they’ve overlooked me," StepanArkadyevitch thought about himself. And he began keeping his eyes andears open, and towards the end of the winter he had discovered a verygood berth and had formed a plan of attack upon it, at first from Moscowthrough aunts, uncles, and friends, and then, when the matter was welladvanced, in the spring, he went himself to Petersburg. It was one ofthose snug, lucrative berths of which there are so many more nowadaysthan there used to be, with incomes ranging from one thousand to fiftythousand roubles. It was the post of secretary of the committee of theamalgamated agency of the southern railways, and of certain bankingcompanies. This position, like all such appointments, called for suchimmense energy and such varied qualifications, that it was difficult forthem to be found united in any one man. And since a man combining allthe qualifications was not to be found, it was at least better that thepost be filled by an honest than by a dishonest man. And StepanArkadyevitch was not merely an honest man—unemphatically—in the commonacceptation of the words, he was an honest man—emphatically—in thatspecial sense which the word has in Moscow, when they talk of an"honest" politician, an "honest" writer, an "honest" newspaper, an"honest" institution, an "honest" tendency, meaning not simply that theman or the institution is not dishonest, but that they are capable onoccasion of taking a line of their own in opposition to the authorities.
Stepan Arkadyevitch moved in those circles in Moscow in which thatexpression had come into use, was regarded there as an honest man, andso had more right to this appointment than others.
The appointment yielded an income of from seven to ten thousand a year,and Oblonsky could fill it without giving up his government position. Itwas in the hands of two ministers, one lady, and two Jews, and all thesepeople, though the way had been paved already with them, StepanArkadyevitch had to see in Petersburg. Besides this business, StepanArkadyevitch had promised his sister Anna to obtain from Karenin adefinite answer on the question of divorce. And begging fifty roublesfrom Dolly, he set off for Petersburg.
Stepan Arkadyevitch sat in Karenin’s study listening to his report onthe causes of the unsatisfactory position of Russian finance, and onlywaiting for the moment when he would finish to speak about his ownbusiness or about Anna.
"Yes, that’s very true," he said, when Alexey Alexandrovitch took offthe pince-nez, without which he could not read now, and lookedinquiringly at his former brother-in-law, "that’s very true inparticular cases, but still the principle of our day is freedom."
"Yes, but I lay down another principle, embracing the principle offreedom," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, with emphasis on the word"embracing," and he put on his pince-nez again, so as to read thepassage in which this statement was made. And turning over thebeautifully written, wide-margined manuscript, Alexey Alexandrovitchread aloud over again the conclusive passage.
"I don’t advocate protection for the sake of private interests, but forthe public weal, and for the lower and upper classes equally," he said,looking over his pince-nez at Oblonsky. "But _they_ cannot grasp that,_they_ are taken up now with personal interests, and carried away byphrases."
Stepan Arkadyevitch knew that when Karenin began to talk of what _they_were doing and thinking, the persons who would not accept his report andwere the cause of everything wrong in Russia, that it was coming nearthe end. And so now he eagerly abandoned the principle of free-trade,and fully agreed. Alexey Alexandrovitch paused, thoughtfully turningover the pages of his manuscript.
"Oh, by the way," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, "I wanted to ask you, sometime when you see Pomorsky, to drop him a hint that I should be veryglad to get that new appointment of secretary of the committee of theamalgamated agency of the southern railways and banking companies."Stepan Arkadyevitch was familiar by now with the title of the post hecoveted, and he brought it out rapidly without mistake.
Alexey Alexandrovitch questioned him as to the duties of this newcommittee, and pondered. He was considering whether the new committeewould not be acting in some way contrary to the views he had beenadvocating. But as the influence of the new committee was of a verycomplex nature, and his views were of very wide application, he couldnot decide this straight off, and taking off his pince-nez, he said:
"Of course, I can mention it to him; but what is your reason preciselyfor wishing to obtain the appointment?"
"It’s a good salary, rising to nine thousand, and my means..."
"Nine thousand!" repeated Alexey Alexandrovitch, and he frowned. Thehigh figure of the salary made him reflect that on that side StepanArkadyevitch’s proposed position ran counter to the main tendency of hisown projects of reform, which always leaned towards economy.
"I consider, and I have embodied my views in a note on the subject, thatin our day these immense salaries are evidence of the unsound economic_assiette_ of our finances."
"But what’s to be done?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "Suppose a bankdirector gets ten thousand—well, he’s worth it; or an engineer getstwenty thousand—after all, it’s a growing thing, you know!"
"I assume that a salary is the price paid for a commodity, and it oughtto conform with the law of supply and demand. If the salary is fixedwithout any regard for that law, as, for instance, when I see twoengineers leaving college together, both equally well trained andefficient, and one getting forty thousand while the other is satisfiedwith two; or when I see lawyers and hussars, having no specialqualifications, appointed directors of banking companies with immensesalaries, I conclude that the salary is not fixed in accordance with thelaw of supply and demand, but simply through personal interest. And thisis an abuse of great gravity in itself, and one that reacts injuriouslyon the government service. I consider..."
Stepan Arkadyevitch made haste to interrupt his brother-in-law.
"Yes; but you must agree that it’s a new institution of undoubtedutility that’s being started. After all, you know, it’s a growing thing!What they lay particular stress on is the thing being carried onhonestly," said Stepan Arkadyevitch with emphasis.
But the Moscow significance of the word "honest" was lost on AlexeyAlexandrovitch.
"Honesty is only a negative qualification," he said.
"Well, you’ll do me a great service, anyway," said Stepan Arkadyevitch,"by putting in a word to Pomorsky—just in the way of conversation...."
"But I fancy it’s more in Volgarinov’s hands," said AlexeyAlexandrovitch.
"Volgarinov has fully assented, as far as he’s concerned," said StepanArkadyevitch, turning red. Stepan Arkadyevitch reddened at the mentionof that name, because he had been that morning at the Jew Volgarinov’s,and the visit had left an unpleasant recollection.
Stepan Arkadyevitch believed most positively that the committee in whichhe was trying to get an appointment was a new, genuine, and honestpublic body, but that morning when Volgarinov had—intentionally, beyonda doubt—kept him two hours waiting with other petitioners in his waitingroom, he had suddenly felt uneasy.
Whether he was uncomfortable that he, a descendant of Rurik, PrinceOblonsky, had been kept for two hours waiting to see a Jew, or that forthe first time in his life he was not following the example of hisancestors in serving the government, but was turning off into a newcareer, anyway he was very uncomfortable. During those two hours inVolgarinov’s waiting room Stepan Arkadyevitch, stepping jauntily aboutthe room, pulling his whiskers, entering into conversation with theother petitioners, and inventing an epigram on his position, assiduouslyconcealed from others, and even from himself, the feeling he wasexperiencing.
But all the time he was uncomfortable and angry, he could not have saidwhy—whether because he could not get his epigram just right, or fromsome other reason. When at last Volgarinov had received him withexaggerated politeness and unmistakable triumph at his humiliation, andhad all but refused the favor asked of him, Stepan Arkadyevitch had madehaste to forget it all as soon as possible. And now, at the mererecollection, he blushed.


Chapter 18

"Now there is something I want to talk about, and you know what it is.About Anna," Stepan Arkadyevitch said, pausing for a brief space, andshaking off the unpleasant impression.
As soon as Oblonsky uttered Anna’s name, the face of AlexeyAlexandrovitch was completely transformed; all the life was gone out ofit, and it looked weary and dead.
"What is it exactly that you want from me?" he said, moving in his chairand snapping his pince-nez.
"A definite settlement, Alexey Alexandrovitch, some settlement of theposition. I’m appealing to you" ("not as an injured husband," StepanArkadyevitch was going to say, but afraid of wrecking his negotiation bythis, he changed the words) "not as a statesman" (which did not sound _àpropos_), "but simply as a man, and a good-hearted man and a Christian.You must have pity on her," he said.
"That is, in what way precisely?" Karenin said softly.
"Yes, pity on her. If you had seen her as I have!—I have been spendingall the winter with her—you would have pity on her. Her position isawful, simply awful!"
"I had imagined," answered Alexey Alexandrovitch in a higher, almostshrill voice, "that Anna Arkadyevna had everything she had desired forherself."
"Oh, Alexey Alexandrovitch, for heaven’s sake, don’t let us indulge inrecriminations! What is past is past, and you know what she wants and iswaiting for—divorce."
"But I believe Anna Arkadyevna refuses a divorce, if I make it acondition to leave me my son. I replied in that sense, and supposed thatthe matter was ended. I consider it at an end," shrieked AlexeyAlexandrovitch.
"But, for heaven’s sake, don’t get hot!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch,touching his brother-in-law’s knee. "The matter is not ended. If youwill allow me to recapitulate, it was like this: when you parted, youwere as magnanimous as could possibly be; you were ready to give hereverything—freedom, divorce even. She appreciated that. No, don’t thinkthat. She did appreciate it—to such a degree that at the first moment,feeling how she had wronged you, she did not consider and could notconsider everything. She gave up everything. But experience, time, haveshown that her position is unbearable, impossible."
"The life of Anna Arkadyevna can have no interest for me," AlexeyAlexandrovitch put in, lifting his eyebrows.
"Allow me to disbelieve that," Stepan Arkadyevitch replied gently. "Herposition is intolerable for her, and of no benefit to anyone whatever.She has deserved it, you will say. She knows that and asks you fornothing; she says plainly that she dare not ask you. But I, all of us,her relatives, all who love her, beg you, entreat you. Why should shesuffer? Who is any the better for it?"
"Excuse me, you seem to put me in the position of the guilty party,"observed Alexey Alexandrovitch.
"Oh, no, oh, no, not at all! please understand me," said StepanArkadyevitch, touching his hand again, as though feeling sure thisphysical contact would soften his brother-in-law. "All I say is this:her position is intolerable, and it might be alleviated by you, and youwill lose nothing by it. I will arrange it all for you, so that you’llnot notice it. You did promise it, you know."
"The promise was given before. And I had supposed that the question ofmy son had settled the matter. Besides, I had hoped that Anna Arkadyevnahad enough generosity..." Alexey Alexandrovitch articulated withdifficulty, his lips twitching and his face white.
"She leaves it all to your generosity. She begs, she implores one thingof you—to extricate her from the impossible position in which she isplaced. She does not ask for her son now. Alexey Alexandrovitch, you area good man. Put yourself in her position for a minute. The question ofdivorce for her in her position is a question of life and death. If youhad not promised it once, she would have reconciled herself to herposition, she would have gone on living in the country. But you promisedit, and she wrote to you, and moved to Moscow. And here she’s been forsix months in Moscow, where every chance meeting cuts her to the heart,every day expecting an answer. Why, it’s like keeping a condemnedcriminal for six months with the rope round his neck, promising himperhaps death, perhaps mercy. Have pity on her, and I will undertake toarrange everything. _Vos scrupules_..."
"I am not talking about that, about that..." Alexey Alexandrovitchinterrupted with disgust. "But, perhaps, I promised what I had no rightto promise."
"So you go back from your promise?"
"I have never refused to do all that is possible, but I want time toconsider how much of what I promised is possible."
"No, Alexey Alexandrovitch!" cried Oblonsky, jumping up, "I won’tbelieve that! She’s unhappy as only an unhappy woman can be, and youcannot refuse in such..."
"As much of what I promised as is possible. _Vous professez d’être librepenseur._ But I as a believer cannot, in a matter of such gravity, actin opposition to the Christian law."
"But in Christian societies and among us, as far as I’m aware, divorceis allowed," said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "Divorce is sanctioned even byour church. And we see..."
"It is allowed, but not in the sense..."
"Alexey Alexandrovitch, you are not like yourself," said Oblonsky, aftera brief pause. "Wasn’t it you (and didn’t we all appreciate it in you?)who forgave everything, and moved simply by Christian feeling was readyto make any sacrifice? You said yourself: if a man take thy coat, givehim thy cloak also, and now..."
"I beg," said Alexey Alexandrovitch shrilly, getting suddenly onto hisfeet, his face white and his jaws twitching, "I beg you to drop this ...to drop ... this subject!"
"Oh, no! Oh, forgive me, forgive me if I have wounded you," said StepanArkadyevitch, holding out his hand with a smile of embarrassment; "butlike a messenger I have simply performed the commission given me."
Alexey Alexandrovitch gave him his hand, pondered a little, and said:
"I must think it over and seek for guidance. The day after tomorrow Iwill give you a final answer," he said, after considering a moment.


Chapter 19

Stepan Arkadyevitch was about to go away when Korney came in toannounce:
"Sergey Alexyevitch!"
"Who’s Sergey Alexyevitch?" Stepan Arkadyevitch was beginning, but heremembered immediately.
"Ah, Seryozha!" he said aloud. "Sergey Alexyevitch! I thought it was thedirector of a department. Anna asked me to see him too," he thought.
And he recalled the timid, piteous expression with which Anna had saidto him at parting: "Anyway, you will see him. Find out exactly where heis, who is looking after him. And Stiva ... if it were possible! Couldit be possible?" Stepan Arkadyevitch knew what was meant by that "if itwere possible,"—if it were possible to arrange the divorce so as to lether have her son.... Stepan Arkadyevitch saw now that it was no good todream of that, but still he was glad to see his nephew.
Alexey Alexandrovitch reminded his brother-in-law that they never spoketo the boy of his mother, and he begged him not to mention a single wordabout her.
"He was very ill after that interview with his mother, which we had notforeseen," said Alexey Alexandrovitch. "Indeed, we feared for his life.But with rational treatment, and sea-bathing in the summer, he regainedhis strength, and now, by the doctor’s advice, I have let him go toschool. And certainly the companionship of school has had a good effecton him, and he is perfectly well, and making good progress."
"What a fine fellow he’s grown! He’s not Seryozha now, but quitefull-fledged Sergey Alexyevitch!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling, ashe looked at the handsome, broad-shouldered lad in blue coat and longtrousers, who walked in alertly and confidently. The boy looked healthyand good-humored. He bowed to his uncle as to a stranger, butrecognizing him, he blushed and turned hurriedly away from him, asthough offended and irritated at something. The boy went up to hisfather and handed him a note of the marks he had gained in school.
"Well, that’s very fair," said his father, "you can go."
"He’s thinner and taller, and has grown out of being a child into a boy;I like that," said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "Do you remember me?"
The boy looked back quickly at his uncle.
"Yes, _mon oncle_," he answered, glancing at his father, and again helooked downcast.
His uncle called him to him, and took his hand.
"Well, and how are you getting on?" he said, wanting to talk to him, andnot knowing what to say.
The boy, blushing and making no answer, cautiously drew his hand away.As soon as Stepan Arkadyevitch let go his hand, he glanced doubtfully athis father, and like a bird set free, he darted out of the room.
A year had passed since the last time Seryozha had seen his mother.Since then he had heard nothing more of her. And in the course of thatyear he had gone to school, and made friends among his schoolfellows.The dreams and memories of his mother, which had made him ill afterseeing her, did not occupy his thoughts now. When they came back to him,he studiously drove them away, regarding them as shameful and girlish,below the dignity of a boy and a schoolboy. He knew that his father andmother were separated by some quarrel, he knew that he had to remainwith his father, and he tried to get used to that idea.
He disliked seeing his uncle, so like his mother, for it called up thosememories of which he was ashamed. He disliked it all the more as fromsome words he had caught as he waited at the study door, and still morefrom the faces of his father and uncle, he guessed that they must havebeen talking of his mother. And to avoid condemning the father with whomhe lived and on whom he was dependent, and, above all, to avoid givingway to sentimentality, which he considered so degrading, Seryozha triednot to look at his uncle who had come to disturb his peace of mind, andnot to think of what he recalled to him.
But when Stepan Arkadyevitch, going out after him, saw him on thestairs, and calling to him, asked him how he spent his playtime atschool, Seryozha talked more freely to him away from his father’spresence.
"We have a railway now," he said in answer to his uncle’s question."It’s like this, do you see: two sit on a bench—they’re the passengers;and one stands up straight on the bench. And all are harnessed to it bytheir arms or by their belts, and they run through all the rooms—thedoors are left open beforehand. Well, and it’s pretty hard work beingthe conductor!"
"That’s the one that stands?" Stepan Arkadyevitch inquired, smiling.
"Yes, you want pluck for it, and cleverness too, especially when theystop all of a sudden, or someone falls down."
"Yes, that must be a serious matter," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, watchingwith mournful interest the eager eyes, like his mother’s; not childishnow—no longer fully innocent. And though he had promised AlexeyAlexandrovitch not to speak of Anna, he could not restrain himself.
"Do you remember your mother?" he asked suddenly.
"No, I don’t," Seryozha said quickly. He blushed crimson, and his faceclouded over. And his uncle could get nothing more out of him. His tutorfound his pupil on the staircase half an hour later, and for a longwhile he could not make out whether he was ill-tempered or crying.
"What is it? I expect you hurt yourself when you fell down?" said thetutor. "I told you it was a dangerous game. And we shall have to speakto the director."
"If I had hurt myself, nobody should have found it out, that’s certain."
"Well, what is it, then?"
"Leave me alone! If I remember, or if I don’t remember?... what businessis it of his? Why should I remember? Leave me in peace!" he said,addressing not his tutor, but the whole world.


Chapter 20

Stepan Arkadyevitch, as usual, did not waste his time in Petersburg. InPetersburg, besides business, his sister’s divorce, and his covetedappointment, he wanted, as he always did, to freshen himself up, as hesaid, after the mustiness of Moscow.
In spite of its _cafés chantants_ and its omnibuses, Moscow was yet astagnant bog. Stepan Arkadyevitch always felt it. After living for sometime in Moscow, especially in close relations with his family, he wasconscious of a depression of spirits. After being a long time in Moscowwithout a change, he reached a point when he positively began to beworrying himself over his wife’s ill-humor and reproaches, over hischildren’s health and education, and the petty details of his officialwork; even the fact of being in debt worried him. But he had only to goand stay a little while in Petersburg, in the circle there in which hemoved, where people lived—really lived—instead of vegetating as inMoscow, and all such ideas vanished and melted away at once, like waxbefore the fire. His wife?... Only that day he had been talking toPrince Tchetchensky. Prince Tchetchensky had a wife and family, grown-uppages in the corps, ... and he had another illegitimate family ofchildren also. Though the first family was very nice too, PrinceTchetchensky felt happier in his second family; and he used to take hiseldest son with him to his second family, and told Stepan Arkadyevitchthat he thought it good for his son, enlarging his ideas. What wouldhave been said to that in Moscow?
His children? In Petersburg children did not prevent their parents fromenjoying life. The children were brought up in schools, and there was notrace of the wild idea that prevailed in Moscow, in Lvov’s household,for instance, that all the luxuries of life were for the children, whilethe parents have nothing but work and anxiety. Here people understoodthat a man is in duty bound to live for himself, as every man of cultureshould live.
His official duties? Official work here was not the stiff, hopelessdrudgery that it was in Moscow. Here there was some interest in officiallife. A chance meeting, a service rendered, a happy phrase, a knack offacetious mimicry, and a man’s career might be made in a trice. So ithad been with Bryantsev, whom Stepan Arkadyevitch had met the previousday, and who was one of the highest functionaries in government now.There was some interest in official work like that.
The Petersburg attitude on pecuniary matters had an especially soothingeffect on Stepan Arkadyevitch. Bartnyansky, who must spend at leastfifty thousand to judge by the style he lived in, had made aninteresting comment the day before on that subject.
As they were talking before dinner, Stepan Arkadyevitch said toBartnyansky:
"You’re friendly, I fancy, with Mordvinsky; you might do me a favor: saya word to him, please, for me. There’s an appointment I should like toget—secretary of the agency..."
"Oh, I shan’t remember all that, if you tell it to me.... But whatpossesses you to have to do with railways and Jews?... Take it as youwill, it’s a low business."
Stepan Arkadyevitch did not say to Bartnyansky that it was a "growingthing"—Bartnyansky would not have understood that.
"I want the money, I’ve nothing to live on."
"You’re living, aren’t you?"
"Yes, but in debt."
"Are you, though? Heavily?" said Bartnyansky sympathetically.
"Very heavily: twenty thousand."
Bartnyansky broke into good-humored laughter.
"Oh, lucky fellow!" said he. "My debts mount up to a million and a half,and I’ve nothing, and still I can live, as you see!"
And Stepan Arkadyevitch saw the correctness of this view not in wordsonly but in actual fact. Zhivahov owed three hundred thousand, andhadn’t a farthing to bless himself with, and he lived, and in style too!Count Krivtsov was considered a hopeless case by everyone, and yet hekept two mistresses. Petrovsky had run through five millions, and stilllived in just the same style, and was even a manager in the financialdepartment with a salary of twenty thousand. But besides this,Petersburg had physically an agreeable effect on Stepan Arkadyevitch. Itmade him younger. In Moscow he sometimes found a gray hair in his head,dropped asleep after dinner, stretched, walked slowly upstairs,breathing heavily, was bored by the society of young women, and did notdance at balls. In Petersburg he always felt ten years younger.
His experience in Petersburg was exactly what had been described to himon the previous day by Prince Pyotr Oblonsky, a man of sixty, who hadjust come back from abroad:
"We don’t know the way to live here," said Pyotr Oblonsky. "I spent thesummer in Baden, and you wouldn’t believe it, I felt quite a young man.At a glimpse of a pretty woman, my thoughts.... One dines and drinks aglass of wine, and feels strong and ready for anything. I came home toRussia—had to see my wife, and, what’s more, go to my country place; andthere, you’d hardly believe it, in a fortnight I’d got into a dressinggown and given up dressing for dinner. Needn’t say I had no thoughtsleft for pretty women. I became quite an old gentleman. There wasnothing left for me but to think of my eternal salvation. I went off toParis—I was as right as could be at once."
Stepan Arkadyevitch felt exactly the difference that Pyotr Oblonskydescribed. In Moscow he degenerated so much that if he had had to bethere for long together, he might in good earnest have come toconsidering his salvation; in Petersburg he felt himself a man of theworld again.
Between Princess Betsy Tverskaya and Stepan Arkadyevitch there had longexisted rather curious relations. Stepan Arkadyevitch always flirtedwith her in jest, and used to say to her, also in jest, the mostunseemly things, knowing that nothing delighted her so much. The dayafter his conversation with Karenin, Stepan Arkadyevitch went to seeher, and felt so youthful that in this jesting flirtation and nonsensehe recklessly went so far that he did not know how to extricate himself,as unluckily he was so far from being attracted by her that he thoughther positively disagreeable. What made it hard to change theconversation was the fact that he was very attractive to her. So that hewas considerably relieved at the arrival of Princess Myakaya, which cutshort their _tête-à-tête_.
"Ah, so you’re here!" said she when she saw him. "Well, and what news ofyour poor sister? You needn’t look at me like that," she added. "Eversince they’ve all turned against her, all those who’re a thousand timesworse than she, I’ve thought she did a very fine thing. I can’t forgiveVronsky for not letting me know when she was in Petersburg. I’d havegone to see her and gone about with her everywhere. Please give her mylove. Come, tell me about her."
"Yes, her position is very difficult; she..." began Stepan Arkadyevitch,in the simplicity of his heart accepting as sterling coin PrincessMyakaya’s words "tell me about her." Princess Myakaya interrupted himimmediately, as she always did, and began talking herself.
"She’s done what they all do, except me—only they hide it. But shewouldn’t be deceitful, and she did a fine thing. And she did betterstill in throwing up that crazy brother-in-law of yours. You must excuseme. Everybody used to say he was so clever, so very clever; I was theonly one that said he was a fool. Now that he’s so thick with LidiaIvanovna and Landau, they all say he’s crazy, and I should prefer not toagree with everybody, but this time I can’t help it."
"Oh, do please explain," said Stepan Arkadyevitch; "what does it mean?Yesterday I was seeing him on my sister’s behalf, and I asked him togive me a final answer. He gave me no answer, and said he would think itover. But this morning, instead of an answer, I received an invitationfrom Countess Lidia Ivanovna for this evening."
"Ah, so that’s it, that’s it!" said Princess Myakaya gleefully, "they’regoing to ask Landau what he’s to say."
"Ask Landau? What for? Who or what’s Landau?"
"What! you don’t know Jules Landau, _le fameux Jules Landau, leclairvoyant_? He’s crazy too, but on him your sister’s fate depends. Seewhat comes of living in the provinces—you know nothing about anything.Landau, do you see, was a _commis_ in a shop in Paris, and he went to adoctor’s; and in the doctor’s waiting room he fell asleep, and in hissleep he began giving advice to all the patients. And wonderful adviceit was! Then the wife of Yury Meledinsky—you know, the invalid?—heard ofthis Landau, and had him to see her husband. And he cured her husband,though I can’t say that I see he did him much good, for he’s just asfeeble a creature as ever he was, but they believed in him, and took himalong with them and brought him to Russia. Here there’s been a generalrush to him, and he’s begun doctoring everyone. He cured CountessBezzubova, and she took such a fancy to him that she adopted him."
"Adopted him?"
"Yes, as her son. He’s not Landau any more now, but Count Bezzubov.That’s neither here nor there, though; but Lidia—I’m very fond of her,but she has a screw loose somewhere—has lost her heart to this Landaunow, and nothing is settled now in her house or Alexey Alexandrovitch’swithout him, and so your sister’s fate is now in the hands of Landau,_alias_ Count Bezzubov."


Chapter 21

After a capital dinner and a great deal of cognac drunk atBartnyansky’s, Stepan Arkadyevitch, only a little later than theappointed time, went in to Countess Lidia Ivanovna’s.
"Who else is with the countess?—a Frenchman?" Stepan Arkadyevitch askedthe hall porter, as he glanced at the familiar overcoat of AlexeyAlexandrovitch and a queer, rather artless-looking overcoat with clasps.
"Alexey Alexandrovitch Karenin and Count Bezzubov," the porter answeredseverely.
"Princess Myakaya guessed right," thought Stepan Arkadyevitch, as hewent upstairs. "Curious! It would be quite as well, though, to get onfriendly terms with her. She has immense influence. If she would say aword to Pomorsky, the thing would be a certainty."
It was still quite light out-of-doors, but in Countess Lidia Ivanovna’slittle drawing room the blinds were drawn and the lamps lighted. At around table under a lamp sat the countess and Alexey Alexandrovitch,talking softly. A short, thinnish man, very pale and handsome, withfeminine hips and knock-kneed legs, with fine brilliant eyes and longhair lying on the collar of his coat, was standing at the end of theroom gazing at the portraits on the wall. After greeting the lady of thehouse and Alexey Alexandrovitch, Stepan Arkadyevitch could not resistglancing once more at the unknown man.
"Monsieur Landau!" the countess addressed him with a softness andcaution that impressed Oblonsky. And she introduced them.
Landau looked round hurriedly, came up, and smiling, laid his moist,lifeless hand in Stepan Arkadyevitch’s outstretched hand and immediatelywalked away and fell to gazing at the portraits again. The countess andAlexey Alexandrovitch looked at each other significantly.
"I am very glad to see you, particularly today," said Countess LidiaIvanovna, pointing Stepan Arkadyevitch to a seat beside Karenin.
"I introduced you to him as Landau," she said in a soft voice, glancingat the Frenchman and again immediately after at Alexey Alexandrovitch,"but he is really Count Bezzubov, as you’re probably aware. Only he doesnot like the title."
"Yes, I heard so," answered Stepan Arkadyevitch; "they say he completelycured Countess Bezzubova."
"She was here today, poor thing!" the countess said, turning to AlexeyAlexandrovitch. "This separation is awful for her. It’s such a blow toher!"
"And he positively is going?" queried Alexey Alexandrovitch.
"Yes, he’s going to Paris. He heard a voice yesterday," said CountessLidia Ivanovna, looking at Stepan Arkadyevitch.
"Ah, a voice!" repeated Oblonsky, feeling that he must be as circumspectas he possibly could in this society, where something peculiar was goingon, or was to go on, to which he had not the key.
A moment’s silence followed, after which Countess Lidia Ivanovna, asthough approaching the main topic of conversation, said with a finesmile to Oblonsky:
"I’ve known you for a long while, and am very glad to make a closeracquaintance with you. _Les amis de nos amis sont nos amis._ But to be atrue friend, one must enter into the spiritual state of one’s friend,and I fear that you are not doing so in the case of AlexeyAlexandrovitch. You understand what I mean?" she said, lifting her finepensive eyes.
"In part, countess, I understand the position of AlexeyAlexandrovitch..." said Oblonsky. Having no clear idea what they weretalking about, he wanted to confine himself to generalities.
"The change is not in his external position," Countess Lidia Ivanovnasaid sternly, following with eyes of love the figure of AlexeyAlexandrovitch as he got up and crossed over to Landau; "his heart ischanged, a new heart has been vouchsafed him, and I fear you don’t fullyapprehend the change that has taken place in him."
"Oh, well, in general outlines I can conceive the change. We have alwaysbeen friendly, and now..." said Stepan Arkadyevitch, responding with asympathetic glance to the expression of the countess, and mentallybalancing the question with which of the two ministers she was mostintimate, so as to know about which to ask her to speak for him.
"The change that has taken place in him cannot lessen his love for hisneighbors; on the contrary, that change can only intensify love in hisheart. But I am afraid you do not understand me. Won’t you have sometea?" she said, with her eyes indicating the footman, who was handinground tea on a tray.
"Not quite, countess. Of course, his misfortune..."
"Yes, a misfortune which has proved the highest happiness, when hisheart was made new, was filled full of it," she said, gazing with eyesfull of love at Stepan Arkadyevitch.
"I do believe I might ask her to speak to both of them," thought StepanArkadyevitch.
"Oh, of course, countess," he said; "but I imagine such changes are amatter so private that no one, even the most intimate friend, would careto speak of them."
"On the contrary! We ought to speak freely and help one another."
"Yes, undoubtedly so, but there is such a difference of convictions, andbesides..." said Oblonsky with a soft smile.
"There can be no difference where it is a question of holy truth."
"Oh, no, of course; but..." and Stepan Arkadyevitch paused in confusion.He understood at last that they were talking of religion.
"I fancy he will fall asleep immediately," said Alexey Alexandrovitch ina whisper full of meaning, going up to Lidia Ivanovna.
Stepan Arkadyevitch looked round. Landau was sitting at the window,leaning on his elbow and the back of his chair, his head drooping.Noticing that all eyes were turned on him he raised his head and smileda smile of childlike artlessness.
"Don’t take any notice," said Lidia Ivanovna, and she lightly moved achair up for Alexey Alexandrovitch. "I have observed..." she wasbeginning, when a footman came into the room with a letter. LidiaIvanovna rapidly ran her eyes over the note, and excusing herself, wrotean answer with extraordinary rapidity, handed it to the man, and cameback to the table. "I have observed," she went on, "that Moscow people,especially the men, are more indifferent to religion than anyone."
"Oh, no, countess, I thought Moscow people had the reputation of beingthe firmest in the faith," answered Stepan Arkadyevitch.
"But as far as I can make out, you are unfortunately one of theindifferent ones," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, turning to him with aweary smile.
"How anyone can be indifferent!" said Lidia Ivanovna.
"I am not so much indifferent on that subject as I am waiting insuspense," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, with his most deprecating smile. "Ihardly think that the time for such questions has come yet for me."
Alexey Alexandrovitch and Lidia Ivanovna looked at each other.
"We can never tell whether the time has come for us or not," said AlexeyAlexandrovitch severely. "We ought not to think whether we are ready ornot ready. God’s grace is not guided by human considerations: sometimesit comes not to those that strive for it, and comes to those that areunprepared, like Saul."
"No, I believe it won’t be just yet," said Lidia Ivanovna, who had beenmeanwhile watching the movements of the Frenchman. Landau got up andcame to them.
"Do you allow me to listen?" he asked.
"Oh, yes; I did not want to disturb you," said Lidia Ivanovna, gazingtenderly at him; "sit here with us."
"One has only not to close one’s eyes to shut out the light," AlexeyAlexandrovitch went on.
"Ah, if you knew the happiness we know, feeling His presence ever in ourhearts!" said Countess Lidia Ivanovna with a rapturous smile.
"But a man may feel himself unworthy sometimes to rise to that height,"said Stepan Arkadyevitch, conscious of hypocrisy in admitting thisreligious height, but at the same time unable to bring himself toacknowledge his free-thinking views before a person who, by a singleword to Pomorsky, might procure him the coveted appointment.
"That is, you mean that sin keeps him back?" said Lidia Ivanovna. "Butthat is a false idea. There is no sin for believers, their sin has beenatoned for. _Pardon,_" she added, looking at the footman, who came inagain with another letter. She read it and gave a verbal answer:"Tomorrow at the Grand Duchess’s, say." "For the believer sin is not,"she went on.
"Yes, but faith without works is dead," said Stepan Arkadyevitch,recalling the phrase from the catechism, and only by his smile clingingto his independence.
"There you have it—from the epistle of St. James," said AlexeyAlexandrovitch, addressing Lidia Ivanovna, with a certainreproachfulness in his tone. It was unmistakably a subject they haddiscussed more than once before. "What harm has been done by the falseinterpretation of that passage! Nothing holds men back from belief likethat misinterpretation. ‘I have not works, so I cannot believe,’ thoughall the while that is not said. But the very opposite is said."
"Striving for God, saving the soul by fasting," said Countess LidiaIvanovna, with disgusted contempt, "those are the crude ideas of ourmonks.... Yet that is nowhere said. It is far simpler and easier," sheadded, looking at Oblonsky with the same encouraging smile with which atcourt she encouraged youthful maids of honor, disconcerted by the newsurroundings of the court.
"We are saved by Christ who suffered for us. We are saved by faith,"Alexey Alexandrovitch chimed in, with a glance of approval at her words.
_"Vous comprenez l’anglais?"_ asked Lidia Ivanovna, and receiving areply in the affirmative, she got up and began looking through a shelfof books.
"I want to read him ‘Safe and Happy,’ or ‘Under the Wing,’" she said,looking inquiringly at Karenin. And finding the book, and sitting downagain in her place, she opened it. "It’s very short. In it is describedthe way by which faith can be reached, and the happiness, above allearthly bliss, with which it fills the soul. The believer cannot beunhappy because he is not alone. But you will see." She was justsettling herself to read when the footman came in again. "MadameBorozdina? Tell her, tomorrow at two o’clock. Yes," she said, puttingher finger in the place in the book, and gazing before her with her finepensive eyes, "that is how true faith acts. You know Marie Sanina? Youknow about her trouble? She lost her only child. She was in despair. Andwhat happened? She found this comforter, and she thanks God now for thedeath of her child. Such is the happiness faith brings!"
"Oh, yes, that is most..." said Stepan Arkadyevitch, glad they weregoing to read, and let him have a chance to collect his faculties. "No,I see I’d better not ask her about anything today," he thought. "If onlyI can get out of this without putting my foot in it!"
"It will be dull for you," said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, addressingLandau; "you don’t know English, but it’s short."
"Oh, I shall understand," said Landau, with the same smile, and heclosed his eyes. Alexey Alexandrovitch and Lidia Ivanovna exchangedmeaningful glances, and the reading began.


Chapter 22

Stepan Arkadyevitch felt completely nonplussed by the strange talk whichhe was hearing for the first time. The complexity of Petersburg, as arule, had a stimulating effect on him, rousing him out of his Moscowstagnation. But he liked these complications, and understood them onlyin the circles he knew and was at home in. In these unfamiliarsurroundings he was puzzled and disconcerted, and could not get hisbearings. As he listened to Countess Lidia Ivanovna, aware of thebeautiful, artless—or perhaps artful, he could not decide which—eyes ofLandau fixed upon him, Stepan Arkadyevitch began to be conscious of apeculiar heaviness in his head.
The most incongruous ideas were in confusion in his head. "Marie Saninais glad her child’s dead.... How good a smoke would be now!... To besaved, one need only believe, and the monks don’t know how the thing’sto be done, but Countess Lidia Ivanovna does know.... And why is my headso heavy? Is it the cognac, or all this being so queer? Anyway, I fancyI’ve done nothing unsuitable so far. But anyway, it won’t do to ask hernow. They say they make one say one’s prayers. I only hope they won’tmake me! That’ll be too imbecile. And what stuff it is she’s reading!but she has a good accent. Landau—Bezzubov—what’s he Bezzubov for?" Allat once Stepan Arkadyevitch became aware that his lower jaw wasuncontrollably forming a yawn. He pulled his whiskers to cover the yawn,and shook himself together. But soon after he became aware that he wasdropping asleep and on the very point of snoring. He recovered himselfat the very moment when the voice of Countess Lidia Ivanovna was saying"he’s asleep." Stepan Arkadyevitch started with dismay, feeling guiltyand caught. But he was reassured at once by seeing that the words "he’sasleep" referred not to him, but to Landau. The Frenchman was asleep aswell as Stepan Arkadyevitch. But Stepan Arkadyevitch’s being asleepwould have offended them, as he thought (though even this, he thought,might not be so, as everything seemed so queer), while Landau’s beingasleep delighted them extremely, especially Countess Lidia Ivanovna.
_"Mon ami,"_ said Lidia Ivanovna, carefully holding the folds of hersilk gown so as not to rustle, and in her excitement calling Karenin notAlexey Alexandrovitch, but _"mon ami," "donnez-lui la main. Vous voyez?Sh!"_ she hissed at the footman as he came in again. "Not at home."
The Frenchman was asleep, or pretending to be asleep, with his head onthe back of his chair, and his moist hand, as it lay on his knee, madefaint movements, as though trying to catch something. AlexeyAlexandrovitch got up, tried to move carefully, but stumbled against thetable, went up and laid his hand in the Frenchman’s hand. StepanArkadyevitch got up too, and opening his eyes wide, trying to wakehimself up if he were asleep, he looked first at one and then at theother. It was all real. Stepan Arkadyevitch felt that his head wasgetting worse and worse.
"_Que la personne qui est arrivee la derniere, celle qui demande,qu’elle sorte! Qu’elle sorte!_" articulated the Frenchman, withoutopening his eyes.
"_Vous m’excuserez, mais vous voyez.... Revenez vers dix heures, encoremieux demain._"
"_Qu’elle sorte!_" repeated the Frenchman impatiently.
"_C’est moi, n’est-ce pas?_" And receiving an answer in the affirmative,Stepan Arkadyevitch, forgetting the favor he had meant to ask of LidiaIvanovna, and forgetting his sister’s affairs, caring for nothing, butfilled with the sole desire to get away as soon as possible, went out ontiptoe and ran out into the street as though from a plague-strickenhouse. For a long while he chatted and joked with his cab-driver, tryingto recover his spirits.
At the French theater where he arrived for the last act, and afterwardsat the Tatar restaurant after his champagne, Stepan Arkadyevitch felt alittle refreshed in the atmosphere he was used to. But still he feltquite unlike himself all that evening.
On getting home to Pyotr Oblonsky’s, where he was staying, StepanArkadyevitch found a note from Betsy. She wrote to him that she was veryanxious to finish their interrupted conversation, and begged him to comenext day. He had scarcely read this note, and frowned at its contents,when he heard below the ponderous tramp of the servants, carryingsomething heavy.
Stepan Arkadyevitch went out to look. It was the rejuvenated PyotrOblonsky. He was so drunk that he could not walk upstairs; but he toldthem to set him on his legs when he saw Stepan Arkadyevitch, andclinging to him, walked with him into his room and there began tellinghim how he had spent the evening, and fell asleep doing so.
Stepan Arkadyevitch was in very low spirits, which happened rarely withhim, and for a long while he could not go to sleep. Everything he couldrecall to his mind, everything was disgusting; but most disgusting ofall, as if it were something shameful, was the memory of the evening hehad spent at Countess Lidia Ivanovna’s.
Next day he received from Alexey Alexandrovitch a final answer, refusingto grant Anna’s divorce, and he understood that this decision was basedon what the Frenchman had said in his real or pretended trance.


Chapter 23

In order to carry through any undertaking in family life, there mustnecessarily be either complete division between the husband and wife, orloving agreement. When the relations of a couple are vacillating andneither one thing nor the other, no sort of enterprise can beundertaken.
Many families remain for years in the same place, though both husbandand wife are sick of it, simply because there is neither completedivision nor agreement between them.
Both Vronsky and Anna felt life in Moscow insupportable in the heat anddust, when the spring sunshine was followed by the glare of summer, andall the trees in the boulevards had long since been in full leaf, andthe leaves were covered with dust. But they did not go back toVozdvizhenskoe, as they had arranged to do long before; they went onstaying in Moscow, though they both loathed it, because of late therehad been no agreement between them.
The irritability that kept them apart had no external cause, and allefforts to come to an understanding intensified it, instead of removingit. It was an inner irritation, grounded in her mind on the convictionthat his love had grown less; in his, on regret that he had put himselffor her sake in a difficult position, which she, instead of lightening,made still more difficult. Neither of them gave full utterance to theirsense of grievance, but they considered each other in the wrong, andtried on every pretext to prove this to one another.
In her eyes the whole of him, with all his habits, ideas, desires, withall his spiritual and physical temperament, was one thing—love forwomen, and that love, she felt, ought to be entirely concentrated on heralone. That love was less; consequently, as she reasoned, he must havetransferred part of his love to other women or to another woman—and shewas jealous. She was jealous not of any particular woman but of thedecrease of his love. Not having got an object for her jealousy, she wason the lookout for it. At the slightest hint she transferred herjealousy from one object to another. At one time she was jealous ofthose low women with whom he might so easily renew his old bachelorties; then she was jealous of the society women he might meet; then shewas jealous of the imaginary girl whom he might want to marry, for whosesake he would break with her. And this last form of jealousy torturedher most of all, especially as he had unwarily told her, in a moment offrankness, that his mother knew him so little that she had had theaudacity to try and persuade him to marry the young Princess Sorokina.
And being jealous of him, Anna was indignant against him and foundgrounds for indignation in everything. For everything that was difficultin her position she blamed him. The agonizing condition of suspense shehad passed in Moscow, the tardiness and indecision of AlexeyAlexandrovitch, her solitude—she put it all down to him. If he had lovedher he would have seen all the bitterness of her position, and wouldhave rescued her from it. For her being in Moscow and not in thecountry, he was to blame too. He could not live buried in the country asshe would have liked to do. He must have society, and he had put her inthis awful position, the bitterness of which he would not see. Andagain, it was his fault that she was forever separated from her son.
Even the rare moments of tenderness that came from time to time did notsoothe her; in his tenderness now she saw a shade of complacency, ofself-confidence, which had not been of old, and which exasperated her.
It was dusk. Anna was alone, and waiting for him to come back from abachelor dinner. She walked up and down in his study (the room where thenoise from the street was least heard), and thought over every detail oftheir yesterday’s quarrel. Going back from the well-remembered,offensive words of the quarrel to what had been the ground of it, shearrived at last at its origin. For a long while she could hardly believethat their dissension had arisen from a conversation so inoffensive, ofso little moment to either. But so it actually had been. It all arosefrom his laughing at the girls’ high schools, declaring they wereuseless, while she defended them. He had spoken slightingly of women’seducation in general, and had said that Hannah, Anna’s English protegée,had not the slightest need to know anything of physics.
This irritated Anna. She saw in this a contemptuous reference to heroccupations. And she bethought her of a phrase to pay him back for thepain he had given her. "I don’t expect you to understand me, myfeelings, as anyone who loved me might, but simple delicacy I didexpect," she said.
And he had actually flushed with vexation, and had said somethingunpleasant. She could not recall her answer, but at that point, with anunmistakable desire to wound her too, he had said:
"I feel no interest in your infatuation over this girl, that’s true,because I see it’s unnatural."
The cruelty with which he shattered the world she had built up forherself so laboriously to enable her to endure her hard life, theinjustice with which he had accused her of affectation, ofartificiality, aroused her.
"I am very sorry that nothing but what’s coarse and material iscomprehensible and natural to you," she said and walked out of the room.
When he had come in to her yesterday evening, they had not referred tothe quarrel, but both felt that the quarrel had been smoothed over, butwas not at an end.
Today he had not been at home all day, and she felt so lonely andwretched in being on bad terms with him that she wanted to forget itall, to forgive him, and be reconciled with him; she wanted to throw theblame on herself and to justify him.
"I am myself to blame. I’m irritable, I’m insanely jealous. I will makeit up with him, and we’ll go away to the country; there I shall be moreat peace."
"Unnatural!" She suddenly recalled the word that had stung her most ofall, not so much the word itself as the intent to wound her with whichit was said. "I know what he meant; he meant—unnatural, not loving myown daughter, to love another person’s child. What does he know of lovefor children, of my love for Seryozha, whom I’ve sacrificed for him? Butthat wish to wound me! No, he loves another woman, it must be so."
And perceiving that, while trying to regain her peace of mind, she hadgone round the same circle that she had been round so often before, andhad come back to her former state of exasperation, she was horrified atherself. "Can it be impossible? Can it be beyond me to control myself?"she said to herself, and began again from the beginning. "He’s truthful,he’s honest, he loves me. I love him, and in a few days the divorce willcome. What more do I want? I want peace of mind and trust, and I willtake the blame on myself. Yes, now when he comes in, I will tell him Iwas wrong, though I was not wrong, and we will go away tomorrow."
And to escape thinking any more, and being overcome by irritability, sherang, and ordered the boxes to be brought up for packing their thingsfor the country.
At ten o’clock Vronsky came in.


Chapter 24

"Well, was it nice?" she asked, coming out to meet him with a penitentand meek expression.
"Just as usual," he answered, seeing at a glance that she was in one ofher good moods. He was used by now to these transitions, and he wasparticularly glad to see it today, as he was in a specially good humorhimself.
"What do I see? Come, that’s good!" he said, pointing to the boxes inthe passage.
"Yes, we must go. I went out for a drive, and it was so fine I longed tobe in the country. There’s nothing to keep you, is there?"
"It’s the one thing I desire. I’ll be back directly, and we’ll talk itover; I only want to change my coat. Order some tea."
And he went into his room.
There was something mortifying in the way he had said "Come, that’sgood," as one says to a child when it leaves off being naughty, andstill more mortifying was the contrast between her penitent and hisself-confident tone; and for one instant she felt the lust of striferising up in her again, but making an effort she conquered it, and metVronsky as good-humoredly as before.
When he came in she told him, partly repeating phrases she had preparedbeforehand, how she had spent the day, and her plans for going away.
"You know it came to me almost like an inspiration," she said. "Why waithere for the divorce? Won’t it be just the same in the country? I can’twait any longer! I don’t want to go on hoping, I don’t want to hearanything about the divorce. I have made up my mind it shall not have anymore influence on my life. Do you agree?"
"Oh, yes!" he said, glancing uneasily at her excited face.
"What did you do? Who was there?" she said, after a pause.
Vronsky mentioned the names of the guests. "The dinner was first rate,and the boat race, and it was all pleasant enough, but in Moscow theycan never do anything without something _ridicule_. A lady of a sortappeared on the scene, teacher of swimming to the Queen of Sweden, andgave us an exhibition of her skill."
"How? did she swim?" asked Anna, frowning.
"In an absurd red _costume de natation;_ she was old and hideous too. Sowhen shall we go?"
"What an absurd fancy! Why, did she swim in some special way, then?"said Anna, not answering.
"There was absolutely nothing in it. That’s just what I say, it wasawfully stupid. Well, then, when do you think of going?"
Anna shook her head as though trying to drive away some unpleasant idea.
"When? Why, the sooner the better! By tomorrow we shan’t be ready. Theday after tomorrow."
"Yes ... oh, no, wait a minute! The day after tomorrow’s Sunday, I haveto be at maman’s," said Vronsky, embarrassed, because as soon as heuttered his mother’s name he was aware of her intent, suspicious eyes.His embarrassment confirmed her suspicion. She flushed hotly and drewaway from him. It was now not the Queen of Sweden’s swimming-mistresswho filled Anna’s imagination, but the young Princess Sorokina. She wasstaying in a village near Moscow with Countess Vronskaya.
"Can’t you go tomorrow?" she said.
"Well, no! The deeds and the money for the business I’m going there forI can’t get by tomorrow," he answered.
"If so, we won’t go at all."
"But why so?"
"I shall not go later. Monday or never!"
"What for?" said Vronsky, as though in amazement. "Why, there’s nomeaning in it!"
"There’s no meaning in it to you, because you care nothing for me. Youdon’t care to understand my life. The one thing that I cared for herewas Hannah. You say it’s affectation. Why, you said yesterday that Idon’t love my daughter, that I love this English girl, that it’sunnatural. I should like to know what life there is for me that could benatural!"
For an instant she had a clear vision of what she was doing, and washorrified at how she had fallen away from her resolution. But eventhough she knew it was her own ruin, she could not restrain herself,could not keep herself from proving to him that he was wrong, could notgive way to him.
"I never said that; I said I did not sympathize with this suddenpassion."
"How is it, though you boast of your straightforwardness, you don’t tellthe truth?"
"I never boast, and I never tell lies," he said slowly, restraining hisrising anger. "It’s a great pity if you can’t respect..."
"Respect was invented to cover the empty place where love should be. Andif you don’t love me any more, it would be better and more honest to sayso."
"No, this is becoming unbearable!" cried Vronsky, getting up from hischair; and stopping short, facing her, he said, speaking deliberately:"What do you try my patience for?" looking as though he might have saidmuch more, but was restraining himself. "It has limits."
"What do you mean by that?" she cried, looking with terror at theundisguised hatred in his whole face, and especially in his cruel,menacing eyes.
"I mean to say..." he was beginning, but he checked himself. "I must askwhat it is you want of me?"
"What can I want? All I can want is that you should not desert me, asyou think of doing," she said, understanding all he had not uttered."But that I don’t want; that’s secondary. I want love, and there isnone. So then all is over."
She turned towards the door.
"Stop! sto-op!" said Vronsky, with no change in the gloomy lines of hisbrows, though he held her by the hand. "What is it all about? I saidthat we must put off going for three days, and on that you told me I waslying, that I was not an honorable man."
"Yes, and I repeat that the man who reproaches me with having sacrificedeverything for me," she said, recalling the words of a still earlierquarrel, "that he’s worse than a dishonorable man—he’s a heartless man."
"Oh, there are limits to endurance!" he cried, and hastily let go herhand.
"He hates me, that’s clear," she thought, and in silence, withoutlooking round, she walked with faltering steps out of the room. "Heloves another woman, that’s even clearer," she said to herself as shewent into her own room. "I want love, and there is none. So, then, allis over." She repeated the words she had said, "and it must be ended."
"But how?" she asked herself, and she sat down in a low chair before thelooking glass.
Thoughts of where she would go now, whether to the aunt who had broughther up, to Dolly, or simply alone abroad, and of what _he_ was doing nowalone in his study; whether this was the final quarrel, or whetherreconciliation were still possible; and of what all her old friends atPetersburg would say of her now; and of how Alexey Alexandrovitch wouldlook at it, and many other ideas of what would happen now after thisrupture, came into her head; but she did not give herself up to themwith all her heart. At the bottom of her heart was some obscure ideathat alone interested her, but she could not get clear sight of it.Thinking once more of Alexey Alexandrovitch, she recalled the time ofher illness after her confinement, and the feeling which never left herat that time. "Why didn’t I die?" and the words and the feeling of thattime came back to her. And all at once she knew what was in her soul.Yes, it was that idea which alone solved all. "Yes, to die!... And theshame and disgrace of Alexey Alexandrovitch and of Seryozha, and myawful shame, it will all be saved by death. To die! and he will feelremorse; will be sorry; will love me; he will suffer on my account."With the trace of a smile of commiseration for herself she sat down inthe armchair, taking off and putting on the rings on her left hand,vividly picturing from different sides his feelings after her death.
Approaching footsteps—his steps—distracted her attention. As thoughabsorbed in the arrangement of her rings, she did not even turn to him.
He went up to her, and taking her by the hand, said softly:
"Anna, we’ll go the day after tomorrow, if you like. I agree toeverything."
She did not speak.
"What is it?" he urged.
"You know," she said, and at the same instant, unable to restrainherself any longer, she burst into sobs.
"Cast me off!" she articulated between her sobs. "I’ll go away tomorrow... I’ll do more. What am I? An immoral woman! A stone round your neck.I don’t want to make you wretched, I don’t want to! I’ll set you free.You don’t love me; you love someone else!"
Vronsky besought her to be calm, and declared that there was no trace offoundation for her jealousy; that he had never ceased, and never wouldcease, to love her; that he loved her more than ever.
"Anna, why distress yourself and me so?" he said to her, kissing herhands. There was tenderness now in his face, and she fancied she caughtthe sound of tears in his voice, and she felt them wet on her hand. Andinstantly Anna’s despairing jealousy changed to a despairing passion oftenderness. She put her arms round him, and covered with kisses hishead, his neck, his hands.


Chapter 25

Feeling that the reconciliation was complete, Anna set eagerly to workin the morning preparing for their departure. Though it was not settledwhether they should go on Monday or Tuesday, as they had each given wayto the other, Anna packed busily, feeling absolutely indifferent whetherthey went a day earlier or later. She was standing in her room over anopen box, taking things out of it, when he came in to see her earlierthan usual, dressed to go out.
"I’m going off at once to see maman; she can send me the money byYegorov. And I shall be ready to go tomorrow," he said.
Though she was in such a good mood, the thought of his visit to hismother’s gave her a pang.
"No, I shan’t be ready by then myself," she said; and at once reflected,"so then it was possible to arrange to do as I wished." "No, do as youmeant to do. Go into the dining room, I’m coming directly. It’s only toturn out those things that aren’t wanted," she said, putting somethingmore on the heap of frippery that lay in Annushka’s arms.
Vronsky was eating his beefsteak when she came into the dining-room.
"You wouldn’t believe how distasteful these rooms have become to me,"she said, sitting down beside him to her coffee. "There’s nothing moreawful than these _chambres garnies_. There’s no individuality in them,no soul. These clocks, and curtains, and, worst of all, thewallpapers—they’re a nightmare. I think of Vozdvizhenskoe as thepromised land. You’re not sending the horses off yet?"
"No, they will come after us. Where are you going to?"
"I wanted to go to Wilson’s to take some dresses to her. So it’s reallyto be tomorrow?" she said in a cheerful voice; but suddenly her facechanged.
Vronsky’s valet came in to ask him to sign a receipt for a telegram fromPetersburg. There was nothing out of the way in Vronsky’s getting atelegram, but he said, as though anxious to conceal something from her,that the receipt was in his study, and he turned hurriedly to her.
"By tomorrow, without fail, I will finish it all."
"From whom is the telegram?" she asked, not hearing him.
"From Stiva," he answered reluctantly.
"Why didn’t you show it to me? What secret can there be between Stivaand me?"
Vronsky called the valet back, and told him to bring the telegram.
"I didn’t want to show it to you, because Stiva has such a passion fortelegraphing: why telegraph when nothing is settled?"
"About the divorce?"
"Yes; but he says he has not been able to come at anything yet. He haspromised a decisive answer in a day or two. But here it is; read it."
With trembling hands Anna took the telegram, and read what Vronsky hadtold her. At the end was added: "Little hope; but I will do everythingpossible and impossible."
"I said yesterday that it’s absolutely nothing to me when I get, orwhether I never get, a divorce," she said, flushing crimson. "There wasnot the slightest necessity to hide it from me." "So he may hide anddoes hide his correspondence with women from me," she thought.
"Yashvin meant to come this morning with Voytov," said Vronsky; "Ibelieve he’s won from Pyevtsov all and more than he can pay, about sixtythousand."
"No," she said, irritated by his so obviously showing by this change ofsubject that he was irritated, "why did you suppose that this news wouldaffect me so, that you must even try to hide it? I said I don’t want toconsider it, and I should have liked you to care as little about it as Ido."
"I care about it because I like definiteness," he said.
"Definiteness is not in the form but the love," she said, more and moreirritated, not by his words, but by the tone of cool composure in whichhe spoke. "What do you want it for?"
"My God! love again," he thought, frowning.
"Oh, you know what for; for your sake and your children’s in thefuture."
"There won’t be children in the future."
"That’s a great pity," he said.
"You want it for the children’s sake, but you don’t think of me?" shesaid, quite forgetting or not having heard that he had said, "_for yoursake_ and the children’s."
The question of the possibility of having children had long been asubject of dispute and irritation to her. His desire to have childrenshe interpreted as a proof he did not prize her beauty.
"Oh, I said: for your sake. Above all for your sake," he repeated,frowning as though in pain, "because I am certain that the greater partof your irritability comes from the indefiniteness of the position."
"Yes, now he has laid aside all pretense, and all his cold hatred for meis apparent," she thought, not hearing his words, but watching withterror the cold, cruel judge who looked mocking her out of his eyes.
"The cause is not that," she said, "and, indeed, I don’t see how thecause of my irritability, as you call it, can be that I am completely inyour power. What indefiniteness is there in the position? on thecontrary..."
"I am very sorry that you don’t care to understand," he interrupted,obstinately anxious to give utterance to his thought. "Theindefiniteness consists in your imagining that I am free."
"On that score you can set your mind quite at rest," she said, andturning away from him, she began drinking her coffee.
She lifted her cup, with her little finger held apart, and put it to herlips. After drinking a few sips she glanced at him, and by hisexpression, she saw clearly that he was repelled by her hand, and hergesture, and the sound made by her lips.
"I don’t care in the least what your mother thinks, and what match shewants to make for you," she said, putting the cup down with a shakinghand.
"But we are not talking about that."
"Yes, that’s just what we are talking about. And let me tell you that aheartless woman, whether she’s old or not old, your mother or anyoneelse, is of no consequence to me, and I would not consent to know her."
"Anna, I beg you not to speak disrespectfully of my mother."
"A woman whose heart does not tell her where her son’s happiness andhonor lie has no heart."
"I repeat my request that you will not speak disrespectfully of mymother, whom I respect," he said, raising his voice and looking sternlyat her.
She did not answer. Looking intently at him, at his face, his hands, sherecalled all the details of their reconciliation the previous day, andhis passionate caresses. "There, just such caresses he has lavished, andwill lavish, and longs to lavish on other women!" she thought.
"You don’t love your mother. That’s all talk, and talk, and talk!" shesaid, looking at him with hatred in her eyes.
"Even if so, you must..."
"Must decide, and I have decided," she said, and she would have goneaway, but at that moment Yashvin walked into the room. Anna greeted himand remained.
Why, when there was a tempest in her soul, and she felt she was standingat a turning point in her life, which might have fearfulconsequences—why, at that minute, she had to keep up appearances beforean outsider, who sooner or later must know it all—she did not know. Butat once quelling the storm within her, she sat down and began talking totheir guest.
"Well, how are you getting on? Has your debt been paid you?" she askedYashvin.
"Oh, pretty fair; I fancy I shan’t get it all, but I shall get a goodhalf. And when are you off?" said Yashvin, looking at Vronsky, andunmistakably guessing at a quarrel.
"The day after tomorrow, I think," said Vronsky.
"You’ve been meaning to go so long, though."
"But now it’s quite decided," said Anna, looking Vronsky straight in theface with a look which told him not to dream of the possibility ofreconciliation.
"Don’t you feel sorry for that unlucky Pyevtsov?" she went on, talkingto Yashvin.
"I’ve never asked myself the question, Anna Arkadyevna, whether I’msorry for him or not. You see, all my fortune’s here"—he touched hisbreast pocket—"and just now I’m a wealthy man. But today I’m going tothe club, and I may come out a beggar. You see, whoever sits down toplay with me—he wants to leave me without a shirt to my back, and so doI him. And so we fight it out, and that’s the pleasure of it."
"Well, but suppose you were married," said Anna, "how would it be foryour wife?"
Yashvin laughed.
"That’s why I’m not married, and never mean to be."
"And Helsingfors?" said Vronsky, entering into the conversation andglancing at Anna’s smiling face. Meeting his eyes, Anna’s face instantlytook a coldly severe expression as though she were saying to him: "It’snot forgotten. It’s all the same."
"Were you really in love?" she said to Yashvin.
"Oh heavens! ever so many times! But you see, some men can play but onlyso that they can always lay down their cards when the hour of a_rendezvous_ comes, while I can take up love, but only so as not to belate for my cards in the evening. That’s how I manage things."
"No, I didn’t mean that, but the real thing." She would have said_Helsingfors_, but would not repeat the word used by Vronsky.
Voytov, who was buying the horse, came in. Anna got up and went out ofthe room.
Before leaving the house, Vronsky went into her room. She would havepretended to be looking for something on the table, but ashamed ofmaking a pretense, she looked straight in his face with cold eyes.
"What do you want?" she asked in French.
"To get the guarantee for Gambetta, I’ve sold him," he said, in a tonewhich said more clearly than words, "I’ve no time for discussing things,and it would lead to nothing."
"I’m not to blame in any way," he thought. "If she will punish herself,_tant pis pour elle._" But as he was going he fancied that she saidsomething, and his heart suddenly ached with pity for her.
"Eh, Anna?" he queried.
"I said nothing," she answered just as coldly and calmly.
"Oh, nothing, _tant pis_ then," he thought, feeling cold again, and heturned and went out. As he was going out he caught a glimpse in thelooking glass of her face, white, with quivering lips. He even wanted tostop and to say some comforting word to her, but his legs carried himout of the room before he could think what to say. The whole of that dayhe spent away from home, and when he came in late in the evening themaid told him that Anna Arkadyevna had a headache and begged him not togo in to her.


Chapter 26

Never before had a day been passed in quarrel. Today was the first time.And this was not a quarrel. It was the open acknowledgment of completecoldness. Was it possible to glance at her as he had glanced when hecame into the room for the guarantee?—to look at her, see her heart wasbreaking with despair, and go out without a word with that face ofcallous composure? He was not merely cold to her, he hated her becausehe loved another woman—that was clear.
And remembering all the cruel words he had said, Anna supplied, too, thewords that he had unmistakably wished to say and could have said to her,and she grew more and more exasperated.
"I won’t prevent you," he might say. "You can go where you like. Youwere unwilling to be divorced from your husband, no doubt so that youmight go back to him. Go back to him. If you want money, I’ll give it toyou. How many roubles do you want?"
All the most cruel words that a brutal man could say, he said to her inher imagination, and she could not forgive him for them, as though hehad actually said them.
"But didn’t he only yesterday swear he loved me, he, a truthful andsincere man? Haven’t I despaired for nothing many times already?" shesaid to herself afterwards.
All that day, except for the visit to Wilson’s, which occupied twohours, Anna spent in doubts whether everything were over or whetherthere were still hope of reconciliation, whether she should go away atonce or see him once more. She was expecting him the whole day, and inthe evening, as she went to her own room, leaving a message for him thather head ached, she said to herself, "If he comes in spite of what themaid says, it means that he loves me still. If not, it means that all isover, and then I will decide what I’m to do!..."
In the evening she heard the rumbling of his carriage stop at theentrance, his ring, his steps and his conversation with the servant; hebelieved what was told him, did not care to find out more, and went tohis own room. So then everything was over.
And death rose clearly and vividly before her mind as the sole means ofbringing back love for her in his heart, of punishing him and of gainingthe victory in that strife which the evil spirit in possession of herheart was waging with him.
Now nothing mattered: going or not going to Vozdvizhenskoe, getting ornot getting a divorce from her husband—all that did not matter. The onething that mattered was punishing him. When she poured herself out herusual dose of opium, and thought that she had only to drink off thewhole bottle to die, it seemed to her so simple and easy, that she beganmusing with enjoyment on how he would suffer, and repent and love hermemory when it would be too late. She lay in bed with open eyes, by thelight of a single burned-down candle, gazing at the carved cornice ofthe ceiling and at the shadow of the screen that covered part of it,while she vividly pictured to herself how he would feel when she wouldbe no more, when she would be only a memory to him. "How could I saysuch cruel things to her?" he would say. "How could I go out of the roomwithout saying anything to her? But now she is no more. She has goneaway from us forever. She is...." Suddenly the shadow of the screenwavered, pounced on the whole cornice, the whole ceiling; other shadowsfrom the other side swooped to meet it, for an instant the shadowsflitted back, but then with fresh swiftness they darted forward,wavered, commingled, and all was darkness. "Death!" she thought. Andsuch horror came upon her that for a long while she could not realizewhere she was, and for a long while her trembling hands could not findthe matches and light another candle, instead of the one that had burneddown and gone out. "No, anything—only to live! Why, I love him! Why, heloves me! This has been before and will pass," she said, feeling thattears of joy at the return to life were trickling down her cheeks. Andto escape from her panic she went hurriedly to his room.
He was asleep there, and sleeping soundly. She went up to him, andholding the light above his face, she gazed a long while at him. Nowwhen he was asleep, she loved him so that at the sight of him she couldnot keep back tears of tenderness. But she knew that if he waked up hewould look at her with cold eyes, convinced that he was right, and thatbefore telling him of her love, she would have to prove to him that hehad been wrong in his treatment of her. Without waking him, she wentback, and after a second dose of opium she fell towards morning into aheavy, incomplete sleep, during which she never quite lostconsciousness.
In the morning she was waked by a horrible nightmare, which had recurredseveral times in her dreams, even before her connection with Vronsky. Alittle old man with unkempt beard was doing something bent down oversome iron, muttering meaningless French words, and she, as she alwaysdid in this nightmare (it was what made the horror of it), felt thatthis peasant was taking no notice of her, but was doing somethinghorrible with the iron—over her. And she waked up in a cold sweat.
When she got up, the previous day came back to her as though veiled inmist.
"There was a quarrel. Just what has happened several times. I said I hada headache, and he did not come in to see me. Tomorrow we’re going away;I must see him and get ready for the journey," she said to herself. Andlearning that he was in his study, she went down to him. As she passedthrough the drawing room she heard a carriage stop at the entrance, andlooking out of the window she saw the carriage, from which a young girlin a lilac hat was leaning out giving some direction to the footmanringing the bell. After a parley in the hall, someone came upstairs, andVronsky’s steps could be heard passing the drawing room. He went rapidlydownstairs. Anna went again to the window. She saw him come out onto thesteps without his hat and go up to the carriage. The young girl in thelilac hat handed him a parcel. Vronsky, smiling, said something to her.The carriage drove away, he ran rapidly upstairs again.
The mists that had shrouded everything in her soul parted suddenly. Thefeelings of yesterday pierced the sick heart with a fresh pang. Shecould not understand now how she could have lowered herself by spendinga whole day with him in his house. She went into his room to announceher determination.
"That was Madame Sorokina and her daughter. They came and brought me themoney and the deeds from maman. I couldn’t get them yesterday. How isyour head, better?" he said quietly, not wishing to see and tounderstand the gloomy and solemn expression of her face.
She looked silently, intently at him, standing in the middle of theroom. He glanced at her, frowned for a moment, and went on reading aletter. She turned, and went deliberately out of the room. He stillmight have turned her back, but she had reached the door, he was stillsilent, and the only sound audible was the rustling of the note paper ashe turned it.
"Oh, by the way," he said at the very moment she was in the doorway,"we’re going tomorrow for certain, aren’t we?"
"You, but not I," she said, turning round to him.
"Anna, we can’t go on like this..."
"You, but not I," she repeated.
"This is getting unbearable!"
"You ... you will be sorry for this," she said, and went out.
Frightened by the desperate expression with which these words wereuttered, he jumped up and would have run after her, but on secondthoughts he sat down and scowled, setting his teeth. This vulgar—as hethought it—threat of something vague exasperated him. "I’ve triedeverything," he thought; "the only thing left is not to pay attention,"and he began to get ready to drive into town, and again to his mother’sto get her signature to the deeds.
She heard the sound of his steps about the study and the dining room. Atthe drawing room he stood still. But he did not turn in to see her, hemerely gave an order that the horse should be given to Voytov if he camewhile he was away. Then she heard the carriage brought round, the dooropened, and he came out again. But he went back into the porch again,and someone was running upstairs. It was the valet running up for hisgloves that had been forgotten. She went to the window and saw him takethe gloves without looking, and touching the coachman on the back hesaid something to him. Then without looking up at the window he settledhimself in his usual attitude in the carriage, with his legs crossed,and drawing on his gloves he vanished round the corner.


Chapter 27

"He has gone! It is over!" Anna said to herself, standing at the window;and in answer to this statement the impression of the darkness when thecandle had flickered out, and of her fearful dream mingling into one,filled her heart with cold terror.
"No, that cannot be!" she cried, and crossing the room she rang thebell. She was so afraid now of being alone, that without waiting for theservant to come in, she went out to meet him.
"Inquire where the count has gone," she said. The servant answered thatthe count had gone to the stable.
"His honor left word that if you cared to drive out, the carriage wouldbe back immediately."
"Very good. Wait a minute. I’ll write a note at once. Send Mihail withthe note to the stables. Make haste."
She sat down and wrote:
"I was wrong. Come back home; I must explain. For God’s sake come! I’mafraid."
She sealed it up and gave it to the servant.
She was afraid of being left alone now; she followed the servant out ofthe room, and went to the nursery.
"Why, this isn’t it, this isn’t he! Where are his blue eyes, his sweet,shy smile?" was her first thought when she saw her chubby, rosy littlegirl with her black, curly hair instead of Seryozha, whom in the tangleof her ideas she had expected to see in the nursery. The little girlsitting at the table was obstinately and violently battering on it witha cork, and staring aimlessly at her mother with her pitch-black eyes.Answering the English nurse that she was quite well, and that she wasgoing to the country tomorrow, Anna sat down by the little girl andbegan spinning the cork to show her. But the child’s loud, ringinglaugh, and the motion of her eyebrows, recalled Vronsky so vividly thatshe got up hurriedly, restraining her sobs, and went away. "Can it beall over? No, it cannot be!" she thought. "He will come back. But howcan he explain that smile, that excitement after he had been talking toher? But even if he doesn’t explain, I will believe. If I don’t believe,there’s only one thing left for me, and I can’t."
She looked at her watch. Twenty minutes had passed. "By now he hasreceived the note and is coming back. Not long, ten minutes more.... Butwhat if he doesn’t come? No, that cannot be. He mustn’t see me withtear-stained eyes. I’ll go and wash. Yes, yes; did I do my hair or not?"she asked herself. And she could not remember. She felt her head withher hand. "Yes, my hair has been done, but when I did it I can’t in theleast remember." She could not believe the evidence of her hand, andwent up to the pier glass to see whether she really had done her hair.She certainly had, but she could not think when she had done it. "Who’sthat?" she thought, looking in the looking glass at the swollen facewith strangely glittering eyes, that looked in a scared way at her."Why, it’s I!" she suddenly understood, and looking round, she seemedall at once to feel his kisses on her, and twitched her shoulders,shuddering. Then she lifted her hand to her lips and kissed it.
"What is it? Why, I’m going out of my mind!" and she went into herbedroom, where Annushka was tidying the room.
"Annushka," she said, coming to a standstill before her, and she staredat the maid, not knowing what to say to her.
"You meant to go and see Darya Alexandrovna," said the girl, as thoughshe understood.
"Darya Alexandrovna? Yes, I’ll go."
"Fifteen minutes there, fifteen minutes back. He’s coming, he’ll be heresoon." She took out her watch and looked at it. "But how could he goaway, leaving me in such a state? How can he live, without making it upwith me?" She went to the window and began looking into the street.Judging by the time, he might be back now. But her calculations might bewrong, and she began once more to recall when he had started and tocount the minutes.
At the moment when she had moved away to the big clock to compare itwith her watch, someone drove up. Glancing out of the window, she sawhis carriage. But no one came upstairs, and voices could be heard below.It was the messenger who had come back in the carriage. She went down tohim.
"We didn’t catch the count. The count had driven off on the lower cityroad."
"What do you say? What!..." she said to the rosy, good-humored Mihail,as he handed her back her note.
"Why, then, he has never received it!" she thought.
"Go with this note to Countess Vronskaya’s place, you know? and bring ananswer back immediately," she said to the messenger.
"And I, what am I going to do?" she thought. "Yes, I’m going to Dolly’s,that’s true or else I shall go out of my mind. Yes, and I can telegraph,too." And she wrote a telegram. "I absolutely must talk to you; come atonce." After sending off the telegram, she went to dress. When she wasdressed and in her hat, she glanced again into the eyes of the plump,comfortable-looking Annushka. There was unmistakable sympathy in thosegood-natured little gray eyes.
"Annushka, dear, what am I to do?" said Anna, sobbing and sinkinghelplessly into a chair.
"Why fret yourself so, Anna Arkadyevna? Why, there’s nothing out of theway. You drive out a little, and it’ll cheer you up," said the maid.
"Yes, I’m going," said Anna, rousing herself and getting up. "And ifthere’s a telegram while I’m away, send it on to Darya Alexandrovna’s... but no, I shall be back myself."
"Yes, I mustn’t think, I must do something, drive somewhere, and most ofall, get out of this house," she said, feeling with terror the strangeturmoil going on in her own heart, and she made haste to go out and getinto the carriage.
"Where to?" asked Pyotr before getting onto the box.
"To Znamenka, the Oblonskys’."


Chapter 28

It was bright and sunny. A fine rain had been falling all the morning,and now it had not long cleared up. The iron roofs, the flags of theroads, the flints of the pavements, the wheels and leather, the brassand the tinplate of the carriages—all glistened brightly in the Maysunshine. It was three o’clock, and the very liveliest time in thestreets.
As she sat in a corner of the comfortable carriage, that hardly swayedon its supple springs, while the grays trotted swiftly, in the midst ofthe unceasing rattle of wheels and the changing impressions in the pureair, Anna ran over the events of the last days, and she saw her positionquite differently from how it had seemed at home. Now the thought ofdeath seemed no longer so terrible and so clear to her, and death itselfno longer seemed so inevitable. Now she blamed herself for thehumiliation to which she had lowered herself. "I entreat him to forgiveme. I have given in to him. I have owned myself in fault. What for?Can’t I live without him?" And leaving unanswered the question how shewas going to live without him, she fell to reading the signs on theshops. "Office and warehouse. Dental surgeon. Yes, I’ll tell Dolly allabout it. She doesn’t like Vronsky. I shall be sick and ashamed, butI’ll tell her. She loves me, and I’ll follow her advice. I won’t give into him; I won’t let him train me as he pleases. Filippov, bun shop. Theysay they send their dough to Petersburg. The Moscow water is so good forit. Ah, the springs at Mitishtchen, and the pancakes!"
And she remembered how, long, long ago, when she was a girl ofseventeen, she had gone with her aunt to Troitsa. "Riding, too. Was thatreally me, with red hands? How much that seemed to me then splendid andout of reach has become worthless, while what I had then has gone out ofmy reach forever! Could I ever have believed then that I could come tosuch humiliation? How conceited and self-satisfied he will be when hegets my note! But I will show him.... How horrid that paint smells! Whyis it they’re always painting and building? _Modes et robes,_" she read.A man bowed to her. It was Annushka’s husband. "Our parasites"; sheremembered how Vronsky had said that. "Our? Why our? What’s so awful isthat one can’t tear up the past by its roots. One can’t tear it out, butone can hide one’s memory of it. And I’ll hide it." And then she thoughtof her past with Alexey Alexandrovitch, of how she had blotted thememory of it out of her life. "Dolly will think I’m leaving my secondhusband, and so I certainly must be in the wrong. As if I cared to beright! I can’t help it!" she said, and she wanted to cry. But at onceshe fell to wondering what those two girls could be smiling about."Love, most likely. They don’t know how dreary it is, how low.... Theboulevard and the children. Three boys running, playing at horses.Seryozha! And I’m losing everything and not getting him back. Yes, I’mlosing everything, if he doesn’t return. Perhaps he was late for thetrain and has come back by now. Longing for humiliation again!" she saidto herself. "No, I’ll go to Dolly, and say straight out to her, I’munhappy, I deserve this, I’m to blame, but still I’m unhappy, help me.These horses, this carriage—how loathsome I am to myself in thiscarriage—all his; but I won’t see them again."
Thinking over the words in which she would tell Dolly, and mentallyworking her heart up to great bitterness, Anna went upstairs.
"Is there anyone with her?" she asked in the hall.
"Katerina Alexandrovna Levin," answered the footman.
"Kitty! Kitty, whom Vronsky was in love with!" thought Anna, "the girlhe thinks of with love. He’s sorry he didn’t marry her. But me he thinksof with hatred, and is sorry he had anything to do with me."
The sisters were having a consultation about nursing when Anna called.Dolly went down alone to see the visitor who had interrupted theirconversation.
"Well, so you’ve not gone away yet? I meant to have come to you," shesaid; "I had a letter from Stiva today."
"We had a telegram too," answered Anna, looking round for Kitty.
"He writes that he can’t make out quite what Alexey Alexandrovitchwants, but he won’t go away without a decisive answer."
"I thought you had someone with you. Can I see the letter?"
"Yes; Kitty," said Dolly, embarrassed. "She stayed in the nursery. Shehas been very ill."
"So I heard. May I see the letter?"
"I’ll get it directly. But he doesn’t refuse; on the contrary, Stiva hashopes," said Dolly, stopping in the doorway.
"I haven’t, and indeed I don’t wish it," said Anna.
"What’s this? Does Kitty consider it degrading to meet me?" thought Annawhen she was alone. "Perhaps she’s right, too. But it’s not for her, thegirl who was in love with Vronsky, it’s not for her to show me that,even if it is true. I know that in my position I can’t be received byany decent woman. I knew that from the first moment I sacrificedeverything to him. And this is my reward! Oh, how I hate him! And whatdid I come here for? I’m worse here, more miserable." She heard from thenext room the sisters’ voices in consultation. "And what am I going tosay to Dolly now? Amuse Kitty by the sight of my wretchedness, submit toher patronizing? No; and besides, Dolly wouldn’t understand. And itwould be no good my telling her. It would only be interesting to seeKitty, to show her how I despise everyone and everything, how nothingmatters to me now."
Dolly came in with the letter. Anna read it and handed it back insilence.
"I knew all that," she said, "and it doesn’t interest me in the least."
"Oh, why so? On the contrary, I have hopes," said Dolly, lookinginquisitively at Anna. She had never seen her in such a strangelyirritable condition. "When are you going away?" she asked.
Anna, half-closing her eyes, looked straight before her and did notanswer.
"Why does Kitty shrink from me?" she said, looking at the door andflushing red.
"Oh, what nonsense! She’s nursing, and things aren’t going right withher, and I’ve been advising her.... She’s delighted. She’ll be here in aminute," said Dolly awkwardly, not clever at lying. "Yes, here she is."
Hearing that Anna had called, Kitty had wanted not to appear, but Dollypersuaded her. Rallying her forces, Kitty went in, walked up to her,blushing, and shook hands.
"I am so glad to see you," she said with a trembling voice.
Kitty had been thrown into confusion by the inward conflict between herantagonism to this bad woman and her desire to be nice to her. But assoon as she saw Anna’s lovely and attractive face, all feeling ofantagonism disappeared.
"I should not have been surprised if you had not cared to meet me. I’mused to everything. You have been ill? Yes, you are changed," said Anna.
Kitty felt that Anna was looking at her with hostile eyes. She ascribedthis hostility to the awkward position in which Anna, who had oncepatronized her, must feel with her now, and she felt sorry for her.
They talked of Kitty’s illness, of the baby, of Stiva, but it wasobvious that nothing interested Anna.
"I came to say good-bye to you," she said, getting up.
"Oh, when are you going?"
But again not answering, Anna turned to Kitty.
"Yes, I am very glad to have seen you," she said with a smile. "I haveheard so much of you from everyone, even from your husband. He came tosee me, and I liked him exceedingly," she said, unmistakably withmalicious intent. "Where is he?"
"He has gone back to the country," said Kitty, blushing.
"Remember me to him, be sure you do."
"I’ll be sure to!" Kitty said naïvely, looking compassionately into hereyes.
"So good-bye, Dolly." And kissing Dolly and shaking hands with Kitty,Anna went out hurriedly.
"She’s just the same and just as charming! She’s very lovely!" saidKitty, when she was alone with her sister. "But there’s somethingpiteous about her. Awfully piteous!"
"Yes, there’s something unusual about her today," said Dolly. "When Iwent with her into the hall, I fancied she was almost crying."


Chapter 29

Anna got into the carriage again in an even worse frame of mind thanwhen she set out from home. To her previous tortures was added now thatsense of mortification and of being an outcast which she had felt sodistinctly on meeting Kitty.
"Where to? Home?" asked Pyotr.
"Yes, home," she said, not even thinking now where she was going.
"How they looked at me as something dreadful, incomprehensible, andcurious! What can he be telling the other with such warmth?" shethought, staring at two men who walked by. "Can one ever tell anyonewhat one is feeling? I meant to tell Dolly, and it’s a good thing Ididn’t tell her. How pleased she would have been at my misery! She wouldhave concealed it, but her chief feeling would have been delight at mybeing punished for the happiness she envied me for. Kitty, she wouldhave been even more pleased. How I can see through her! She knows I wasmore than usually sweet to her husband. And she’s jealous and hates me.And she despises me. In her eyes I’m an immoral woman. If I were animmoral woman I could have made her husband fall in love with me ... ifI’d cared to. And, indeed, I did care to. There’s someone who’s pleasedwith himself," she thought, as she saw a fat, rubicund gentleman comingtowards her. He took her for an acquaintance, and lifted his glossy hatabove his bald, glossy head, and then perceived his mistake. "He thoughthe knew me. Well, he knows me as well as anyone in the world knows me. Idon’t know myself. I know my appetites, as the French say. They wantthat dirty ice cream, that they do know for certain," she thought,looking at two boys stopping an ice cream seller, who took a barrel offhis head and began wiping his perspiring face with a towel. "We all wantwhat is sweet and nice. If not sweetmeats, then a dirty ice. And Kitty’sthe same—if not Vronsky, then Levin. And she envies me, and hates me.And we all hate each other. I Kitty, Kitty me. Yes, that’s the truth.‘_Tiutkin, coiffeur._’ _Je me fais coiffer par Tiutkin...._ I’ll tellhim that when he comes," she thought and smiled. But the same instantshe remembered that she had no one now to tell anything amusing to. "Andthere’s nothing amusing, nothing mirthful, really. It’s all hateful.They’re singing for vespers, and how carefully that merchant crosseshimself! as if he were afraid of missing something. Why these churchesand this singing and this humbug? Simply to conceal that we all hateeach other like these cab drivers who are abusing each other so angrily.Yashvin says, ‘He wants to strip me of my shirt, and I him of his.’ Yes,that’s the truth!"
She was plunged in these thoughts, which so engrossed her that she leftoff thinking of her own position, when the carriage drew up at the stepsof her house. It was only when she saw the porter running out to meether that she remembered she had sent the note and the telegram.
"Is there an answer?" she inquired.
"I’ll see this minute," answered the porter, and glancing into his room,he took out and gave her the thin square envelope of a telegram. "Ican’t come before ten o’clock.—Vronsky," she read.
"And hasn’t the messenger come back?"
"No," answered the porter.
"Then, since it’s so, I know what I must do," she said, and feeling avague fury and craving for revenge rising up within her, she ranupstairs. "I’ll go to him myself. Before going away forever, I’ll tellhim all. Never have I hated anyone as I hate that man!" she thought.Seeing his hat on the rack, she shuddered with aversion. She did notconsider that his telegram was an answer to her telegram and that he hadnot yet received her note. She pictured him to herself as talking calmlyto his mother and Princess Sorokina and rejoicing at her sufferings."Yes, I must go quickly," she said, not knowing yet where she was going.She longed to get away as quickly as possible from the feelings she hadgone through in that awful house. The servants, the walls, the things inthat house—all aroused repulsion and hatred in her and lay like a weightupon her.
"Yes, I must go to the railway station, and if he’s not there, then gothere and catch him." Anna looked at the railway timetable in thenewspapers. An evening train went at two minutes past eight. "Yes, Ishall be in time." She gave orders for the other horses to be put in thecarriage, and packed in a traveling-bag the things needed for a fewdays. She knew she would never come back here again.
Among the plans that came into her head she vaguely determined thatafter what would happen at the station or at the countess’s house, shewould go as far as the first town on the Nizhni road and stop there.
Dinner was on the table; she went up, but the smell of the bread andcheese was enough to make her feel that all food was disgusting. Sheordered the carriage and went out. The house threw a shadow now rightacross the street, but it was a bright evening and still warm in thesunshine. Annushka, who came down with her things, and Pyotr, who putthe things in the carriage, and the coachman, evidently out of humor,were all hateful to her, and irritated her by their words and actions.
"I don’t want you, Pyotr."
"But how about the ticket?"
"Well, as you like, it doesn’t matter," she said crossly.
Pyotr jumped on the box, and putting his arms akimbo, told the coachmanto drive to the booking-office.


Chapter 30

"Here it is again! Again I understand it all!" Anna said to herself, assoon as the carriage had started and swaying lightly, rumbled over thetiny cobbles of the paved road, and again one impression followedrapidly upon another.
"Yes; what was the last thing I thought of so clearly?" she tried torecall it. "‘_Tiutkin, coiffeur?_’—no, not that. Yes, of what Yashvinsays, the struggle for existence and hatred is the one thing that holdsmen together. No, it’s a useless journey you’re making," she said,mentally addressing a party in a coach and four, evidently going for anexcursion into the country. "And the dog you’re taking with you will beno help to you. You can’t get away from yourselves." Turning her eyes inthe direction Pyotr had turned to look, she saw a factory hand almostdead drunk, with hanging head, being led away by a policeman. "Come,he’s found a quicker way," she thought. "Count Vronsky and I did notfind that happiness either, though we expected so much from it." And nowfor the first time Anna turned that glaring light in which she wasseeing everything on to her relations with him, which she had hithertoavoided thinking about. "What was it he sought in me? Not love so muchas the satisfaction of vanity." She remembered his words, the expressionof his face, that recalled an abject setter-dog, in the early days oftheir connection. And everything now confirmed this. "Yes, there was thetriumph of success in him. Of course there was love too, but the chiefelement was the pride of success. He boasted of me. Now that’s over.There’s nothing to be proud of. Not to be proud of, but to be ashamedof. He has taken from me all he could, and now I am no use to him. He isweary of me and is trying not to be dishonorable in his behavior to me.He let that out yesterday—he wants divorce and marriage so as to burnhis ships. He loves me, but how? The zest is gone, as the English say.That fellow wants everyone to admire him and is very much pleased withhimself," she thought, looking at a red-faced clerk, riding on a ridingschool horse. "Yes, there’s not the same flavor about me for him now. IfI go away from him, at the bottom of his heart he will be glad."
This was not mere supposition, she saw it distinctly in the piercinglight, which revealed to her now the meaning of life and humanrelations.
"My love keeps growing more passionate and egoistic, while his is waningand waning, and that’s why we’re drifting apart." She went on musing."And there’s no help for it. He is everything for me, and I want himmore and more to give himself up to me entirely. And he wants more andmore to get away from me. We walked to meet each other up to the time ofour love, and then we have been irresistibly drifting in differentdirections. And there’s no altering that. He tells me I’m insanelyjealous, and I have told myself that I am insanely jealous; but it’s nottrue. I’m not jealous, but I’m unsatisfied. But..." she opened her lips,and shifted her place in the carriage in the excitement, aroused by thethought that suddenly struck her. "If I could be anything but amistress, passionately caring for nothing but his caresses; but I can’tand I don’t care to be anything else. And by that desire I rouseaversion in him, and he rouses fury in me, and it cannot be different.Don’t I know that he wouldn’t deceive me, that he has no schemes aboutPrincess Sorokina, that he’s not in love with Kitty, that he won’tdesert me! I know all that, but it makes it no better for me. If withoutloving me, from _duty_ he’ll be good and kind to me, without what Iwant, that’s a thousand times worse than unkindness! That’s—hell! Andthat’s just how it is. For a long while now he hasn’t loved me. Andwhere love ends, hate begins. I don’t know these streets at all. Hillsit seems, and still houses, and houses .... And in the houses alwayspeople and people.... How many of them, no end, and all hating eachother! Come, let me try and think what I want, to make me happy. Well?Suppose I am divorced, and Alexey Alexandrovitch lets me have Seryozha,and I marry Vronsky." Thinking of Alexey Alexandrovitch, she at oncepictured him with extraordinary vividness as though he were alive beforeher, with his mild, lifeless, dull eyes, the blue veins in his whitehands, his intonations and the cracking of his fingers, and rememberingthe feeling which had existed between them, and which was also calledlove, she shuddered with loathing. "Well, I’m divorced, and becomeVronsky’s wife. Well, will Kitty cease looking at me as she looked at metoday? No. And will Seryozha leave off asking and wondering about my twohusbands? And is there any new feeling I can awaken between Vronsky andme? Is there possible, if not happiness, some sort of ease from misery?No, no!" she answered now without the slightest hesitation. "Impossible!We are drawn apart by life, and I make his unhappiness, and he mine, andthere’s no altering him or me. Every attempt has been made, the screwhas come unscrewed. Oh, a beggar woman with a baby. She thinks I’m sorryfor her. Aren’t we all flung into the world only to hate each other, andso to torture ourselves and each other? Schoolboys coming—laughingSeryozha?" she thought. "I thought, too, that I loved him, and used tobe touched by my own tenderness. But I have lived without him, I gavehim up for another love, and did not regret the exchange till that lovewas satisfied." And with loathing she thought of what she meant by thatlove. And the clearness with which she saw life now, her own and allmen’s, was a pleasure to her. "It’s so with me and Pyotr, and thecoachman, Fyodor, and that merchant, and all the people living along theVolga, where those placards invite one to go, and everywhere andalways," she thought when she had driven under the low-pitched roof ofthe Nizhigorod station, and the porters ran to meet her.
"A ticket to Obiralovka?" said Pyotr.
She had utterly forgotten where and why she was going, and only by agreat effort she understood the question.
"Yes," she said, handing him her purse, and taking a little red bag inher hand, she got out of the carriage.
Making her way through the crowd to the first-class waiting-room, shegradually recollected all the details of her position, and the plansbetween which she was hesitating. And again at the old sore places, hopeand then despair poisoned the wounds of her tortured, fearfullythrobbing heart. As she sat on the star-shaped sofa waiting for thetrain, she gazed with aversion at the people coming and going (they wereall hateful to her), and thought how she would arrive at the station,would write him a note, and what she would write to him, and how he wasat this moment complaining to his mother of his position, notunderstanding her sufferings, and how she would go into the room, andwhat she would say to him. Then she thought that life might still behappy, and how miserably she loved and hated him, and how fearfully herheart was beating.


Chapter 31

A bell rang, some young men, ugly and impudent, and at the same timecareful of the impression they were making, hurried by. Pyotr, too,crossed the room in his livery and top-boots, with his dull, animalface, and came up to her to take her to the train. Some noisy men werequiet as she passed them on the platform, and one whispered somethingabout her to another—something vile, no doubt. She stepped up on thehigh step, and sat down in a carriage by herself on a dirty seat thathad been white. Her bag lay beside her, shaken up and down by thespringiness of the seat. With a foolish smile Pyotr raised his hat, withits colored band, at the window, in token of farewell; an impudentconductor slammed the door and the latch. A grotesque-looking ladywearing a bustle (Anna mentally undressed the woman, and was appalled ather hideousness), and a little girl laughing affectedly ran down theplatform.
"Katerina Andreevna, she’s got them all, _ma tante!_" cried the girl.
"Even the child’s hideous and affected," thought Anna. To avoid seeinganyone, she got up quickly and seated herself at the opposite window ofthe empty carriage. A misshapen-looking peasant covered with dirt, in acap from which his tangled hair stuck out all round, passed by thatwindow, stooping down to the carriage wheels. "There’s somethingfamiliar about that hideous peasant," thought Anna. And remembering herdream, she moved away to the opposite door, shaking with terror. Theconductor opened the door and let in a man and his wife.
"Do you wish to get out?"
Anna made no answer. The conductor and her two fellow-passengers did notnotice under her veil her panic-stricken face. She went back to hercorner and sat down. The couple seated themselves on the opposite side,and intently but surreptitiously scrutinized her clothes. Both husbandand wife seemed repulsive to Anna. The husband asked, would she allowhim to smoke, obviously not with a view to smoking but to getting intoconversation with her. Receiving her assent, he said to his wife inFrench something about caring less to smoke than to talk. They madeinane and affected remarks to one another, entirely for her benefit.Anna saw clearly that they were sick of each other, and hated eachother. And no one could have helped hating such miserable monstrosities.
A second bell sounded, and was followed by moving of luggage, noise,shouting and laughter. It was so clear to Anna that there was nothingfor anyone to be glad of, that this laughter irritated her agonizingly,and she would have liked to stop up her ears not to hear it. At last thethird bell rang, there was a whistle and a hiss of steam, and a clank ofchains, and the man in her carriage crossed himself. "It would beinteresting to ask him what meaning he attaches to that," thought Anna,looking angrily at him. She looked past the lady out of the window atthe people who seemed whirling by as they ran beside the train or stoodon the platform. The train, jerking at regular intervals at thejunctions of the rails, rolled by the platform, past a stone wall, asignal-box, past other trains; the wheels, moving more smoothly andevenly, resounded with a slight clang on the rails. The window waslighted up by the bright evening sun, and a slight breeze fluttered thecurtain. Anna forgot her fellow passengers, and to the light swaying ofthe train she fell to thinking again, as she breathed the fresh air.
"Yes, what did I stop at? That I couldn’t conceive a position in whichlife would not be a misery, that we are all created to be miserable, andthat we all know it, and all invent means of deceiving each other. Andwhen one sees the truth, what is one to do?"
"That’s what reason is given man for, to escape from what worries him,"said the lady in French, lisping affectedly, and obviously pleased withher phrase.
The words seemed an answer to Anna’s thoughts.
"To escape from what worries him," repeated Anna. And glancing at thered-cheeked husband and the thin wife, she saw that the sickly wifeconsidered herself misunderstood, and the husband deceived her andencouraged her in that idea of herself. Anna seemed to see all theirhistory and all the crannies of their souls, as it were turning a lightupon them. But there was nothing interesting in them, and she pursuedher thought.
"Yes, I’m very much worried, and that’s what reason was given me for, toescape; so then one must escape: why not put out the light when there’snothing more to look at, when it’s sickening to look at it all? But how?Why did the conductor run along the footboard, why are they shrieking,those young men in that train? why are they talking, why are theylaughing? It’s all falsehood, all lying, all humbug, all cruelty!..."
When the train came into the station, Anna got out into the crowd ofpassengers, and moving apart from them as if they were lepers, she stoodon the platform, trying to think what she had come here for, and whatshe meant to do. Everything that had seemed to her possible before wasnow so difficult to consider, especially in this noisy crowd of hideouspeople who would not leave her alone. One moment porters ran up to herproffering their services, then young men, clacking their heels on theplanks of the platform and talking loudly, stared at her; people meetingher dodged past on the wrong side. Remembering that she had meant to goon further if there were no answer, she stopped a porter and asked ifher coachman were not here with a note from Count Vronsky.
"Count Vronsky? They sent up here from the Vronskys just this minute, tomeet Princess Sorokina and her daughter. And what is the coachman like?"
Just as she was talking to the porter, the coachman Mihail, red andcheerful in his smart blue coat and chain, evidently proud of having sosuccessfully performed his commission, came up to her and gave her aletter. She broke it open, and her heart ached before she had read it.
"I am very sorry your note did not reach me. I will be home at ten,"Vronsky had written carelessly....
"Yes, that’s what I expected!" she said to herself with an evil smile.
"Very good, you can go home then," she said softly, addressing Mihail.She spoke softly because the rapidity of her heart’s beating hinderedher breathing. "No, I won’t let you make me miserable," she thoughtmenacingly, addressing not him, not herself, but the power that made hersuffer, and she walked along the platform.
Two maid-servants walking along the platform turned their heads, staringat her and making some remarks about her dress. "Real," they said of thelace she was wearing. The young men would not leave her in peace. Againthey passed by, peering into her face, and with a laugh shoutingsomething in an unnatural voice. The station-master coming up asked herwhether she was going by train. A boy selling kvas never took his eyesoff her. "My God! where am I to go?" she thought, going farther andfarther along the platform. At the end she stopped. Some ladies andchildren, who had come to meet a gentleman in spectacles, paused intheir loud laughter and talking, and stared at her as she reached them.She quickened her pace and walked away from them to the edge of theplatform. A luggage train was coming in. The platform began to sway, andshe fancied she was in the train again.
And all at once she thought of the man crushed by the train the day shehad first met Vronsky, and she knew what she had to do. With a rapid,light step she went down the steps that led from the tank to the railsand stopped quite near the approaching train.
She looked at the lower part of the carriages, at the screws and chainsand the tall cast-iron wheel of the first carriage slowly moving up, andtrying to measure the middle between the front and back wheels, and thevery minute when that middle point would be opposite her.
"There," she said to herself, looking into the shadow of the carriage,at the sand and coal dust which covered the sleepers—"there, in the verymiddle, and I will punish him and escape from everyone and from myself."
She tried to fling herself below the wheels of the first carriage as itreached her; but the red bag which she tried to drop out of her handdelayed her, and she was too late; she missed the moment. She had towait for the next carriage. A feeling such as she had known when aboutto take the first plunge in bathing came upon her, and she crossedherself. That familiar gesture brought back into her soul a whole seriesof girlish and childish memories, and suddenly the darkness that hadcovered everything for her was torn apart, and life rose up before herfor an instant with all its bright past joys. But she did not take hereyes from the wheels of the second carriage. And exactly at the momentwhen the space between the wheels came opposite her, she dropped the redbag, and drawing her head back into her shoulders, fell on her handsunder the carriage, and lightly, as though she would rise again at once,dropped on to her knees. And at the same instant she was terror-strickenat what she was doing. "Where am I? What am I doing? What for?" Shetried to get up, to drop backwards; but something huge and mercilessstruck her on the head and rolled her on her back. "Lord, forgive meall!" she said, feeling it impossible to struggle. A peasant mutteringsomething was working at the iron above her. And the light by which shehad read the book filled with troubles, falsehoods, sorrow, and evil,flared up more brightly than ever before, lighted up for her all thathad been in darkness, flickered, began to grow dim, and was quenchedforever.



PART EIGHT


Chapter 1

Almost two months had passed. The hot summer was half over, but SergeyIvanovitch was only just preparing to leave Moscow.
Sergey Ivanovitch’s life had not been uneventful during this time. Ayear ago he had finished his book, the fruit of six years’ labor,"Sketch of a Survey of the Principles and Forms of Government in Europeand Russia." Several sections of this book and its introduction hadappeared in periodical publications, and other parts had been read bySergey Ivanovitch to persons of his circle, so that the leading ideas ofthe work could not be completely novel to the public. But still SergeyIvanovitch had expected that on its appearance his book would be sure tomake a serious impression on society, and if it did not cause arevolution in social science it would, at any rate, make a great stir inthe scientific world.
After the most conscientious revision the book had last year beenpublished, and had been distributed among the booksellers.
Though he asked no one about it, reluctantly and with feignedindifference answered his friends’ inquiries as to how the book wasgoing, and did not even inquire of the booksellers how the book wasselling, Sergey Ivanovitch was all on the alert, with strainedattention, watching for the first impression his book would make in theworld and in literature.
But a week passed, a second, a third, and in society no impressionwhatever could be detected. His friends who were specialists andsavants, occasionally—unmistakably from politeness—alluded to it. Therest of his acquaintances, not interested in a book on a learnedsubject, did not talk of it at all. And society generally—just nowespecially absorbed in other things—was absolutely indifferent. In thepress, too, for a whole month there was not a word about his book.
Sergey Ivanovitch had calculated to a nicety the time necessary forwriting a review, but a month passed, and a second, and still there wassilence.
Only in the _Northern Beetle_, in a comic article on the singerDrabanti, who had lost his voice, there was a contemptuous allusion toKoznishev’s book, suggesting that the book had been long ago seenthrough by everyone, and was a subject of general ridicule.
At last in the third month a critical article appeared in a seriousreview. Sergey Ivanovitch knew the author of the article. He had met himonce at Golubtsov’s.
The author of the article was a young man, an invalid, very bold as awriter, but extremely deficient in breeding and shy in personalrelations.
In spite of his absolute contempt for the author, it was with completerespect that Sergey Ivanovitch set about reading the article. Thearticle was awful.
The critic had undoubtedly put an interpretation upon the book whichcould not possibly be put on it. But he had selected quotations soadroitly that for people who had not read the book (and obviouslyscarcely anyone had read it) it seemed absolutely clear that the wholebook was nothing but a medley of high-flown phrases, not even—assuggested by marks of interrogation—used appropriately, and that theauthor of the book was a person absolutely without knowledge of thesubject. And all this was so wittily done that Sergey Ivanovitch wouldnot have disowned such wit himself. But that was just what was so awful.
In spite of the scrupulous conscientiousness with which SergeyIvanovitch verified the correctness of the critic’s arguments, he didnot for a minute stop to ponder over the faults and mistakes which wereridiculed; but unconsciously he began immediately trying to recall everydetail of his meeting and conversation with the author of the article.
"Didn’t I offend him in some way?" Sergey Ivanovitch wondered.
And remembering that when they met he had corrected the young man aboutsomething he had said that betrayed ignorance, Sergey Ivanovitch foundthe clue to explain the article.
This article was followed by a deadly silence about the book both in thepress and in conversation, and Sergey Ivanovitch saw that his six years’task, toiled at with such love and labor, had gone, leaving no trace.
Sergey Ivanovitch’s position was still more difficult from the factthat, since he had finished his book, he had had no more literary workto do, such as had hitherto occupied the greater part of his time.
Sergey Ivanovitch was clever, cultivated, healthy, and energetic, and hedid not know what use to make of his energy. Conversations in drawingrooms, in meetings, assemblies, and committees—everywhere where talk waspossible—took up part of his time. But being used for years to townlife, he did not waste all his energies in talk, as his less experiencedyounger brother did, when he was in Moscow. He had a great deal ofleisure and intellectual energy still to dispose of.
Fortunately for him, at this period so difficult for him from thefailure of his book, the various public questions of the dissentingsects, of the American alliance, of the Samara famine, of exhibitions,and of spiritualism, were definitely replaced in public interest by theSlavonic question, which had hitherto rather languidly interestedsociety, and Sergey Ivanovitch, who had been one of the first to raisethis subject, threw himself into it heart and soul.
In the circle to which Sergey Ivanovitch belonged, nothing was talked ofor written about just now but the Servian War. Everything that the idlecrowd usually does to kill time was done now for the benefit of theSlavonic States. Balls, concerts, dinners, matchboxes, ladies’ dresses,beer, restaurants—everything testified to sympathy with the Slavonicpeoples.
From much of what was spoken and written on the subject, SergeyIvanovitch differed on various points. He saw that the Slavonic questionhad become one of those fashionable distractions which succeed oneanother in providing society with an object and an occupation. He saw,too, that a great many people were taking up the subject from motives ofself-interest and self-advertisement. He recognized that the newspaperspublished a great deal that was superfluous and exaggerated, with thesole aim of attracting attention and outbidding one another. He saw thatin this general movement those who thrust themselves most forward andshouted the loudest were men who had failed and were smarting under asense of injury—generals without armies, ministers not in the ministry,journalists not on any paper, party leaders without followers. He sawthat there was a great deal in it that was frivolous and absurd. But hesaw and recognized an unmistakable growing enthusiasm, uniting allclasses, with which it was impossible not to sympathize. The massacre ofmen who were fellow Christians, and of the same Slavonic race, excitedsympathy for the sufferers and indignation against the oppressors. Andthe heroism of the Servians and Montenegrins struggling for a greatcause begot in the whole people a longing to help their brothers not inword but in deed.
But in this there was another aspect that rejoiced Sergey Ivanovitch.That was the manifestation of public opinion. The public had definitelyexpressed its desire. The soul of the people had, as Sergey Ivanovitchsaid, found expression. And the more he worked in this cause, the moreincontestable it seemed to him that it was a cause destined to assumevast dimensions, to create an epoch.
He threw himself heart and soul into the service of this great cause,and forgot to think about his book. His whole time now was engrossed byit, so that he could scarcely manage to answer all the letters andappeals addressed to him. He worked the whole spring and part of thesummer, and it was only in July that he prepared to go away to hisbrother’s in the country.
He was going both to rest for a fortnight, and in the very heart of thepeople, in the farthest wilds of the country, to enjoy the sight of thatuplifting of the spirit of the people, of which, like all residents inthe capital and big towns, he was fully persuaded. Katavasov had longbeen meaning to carry out his promise to stay with Levin, and so he wasgoing with him.


Chapter 2

Sergey Ivanovitch and Katavasov had only just reached the station of theKursk line, which was particularly busy and full of people that day,when, looking round for the groom who was following with their things,they saw a party of volunteers driving up in four cabs. Ladies met themwith bouquets of flowers, and followed by the rushing crowd they wentinto the station.
One of the ladies, who had met the volunteers, came out of the hall andaddressed Sergey Ivanovitch.
"You too come to see them off?" she asked in French.
"No, I’m going away myself, princess. To my brother’s for a holiday. Doyou always see them off?" said Sergey Ivanovitch with a hardlyperceptible smile.
"Oh, that would be impossible!" answered the princess. "Is it true thateight hundred have been sent from us already? Malvinsky wouldn’t believeme."
"More than eight hundred. If you reckon those who have been sent notdirectly from Moscow, over a thousand," answered Sergey Ivanovitch.
"There! That’s just what I said!" exclaimed the lady. "And it’s truetoo, I suppose, that more than a million has been subscribed?"
"Yes, princess."
"What do you say to today’s telegram? Beaten the Turks again."
"Yes, so I saw," answered Sergey Ivanovitch. They were speaking of thelast telegram stating that the Turks had been for three days insuccession beaten at all points and put to flight, and that tomorrow adecisive engagement was expected.
"Ah, by the way, a splendid young fellow has asked leave to go, andthey’ve made some difficulty, I don’t know why. I meant to ask you; Iknow him; please write a note about his case. He’s being sent byCountess Lidia Ivanovna."
Sergey Ivanovitch asked for all the details the princess knew about theyoung man, and going into the first-class waiting-room, wrote a note tothe person on whom the granting of leave of absence depended, and handedit to the princess.
"You know Count Vronsky, the notorious one ... is going by this train?"said the princess with a smile full of triumph and meaning, when hefound her again and gave her the letter.
"I had heard he was going, but I did not know when. By this train?"
"I’ve seen him. He’s here: there’s only his mother seeing him off. It’sthe best thing, anyway, that he could do."
"Oh, yes, of course."
While they were talking the crowd streamed by them into the dining room.They went forward too, and heard a gentleman with a glass in his handdelivering a loud discourse to the volunteers. "In the service ofreligion, humanity, and our brothers," the gentleman said, his voicegrowing louder and louder; "to this great cause mother Moscow dedicatesyou with her blessing. _Jivio!_" he concluded, loudly and tearfully.
Everyone shouted _Jivio!_ and a fresh crowd dashed into the hall, almostcarrying the princess off her legs.
"Ah, princess! that was something like!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch,suddenly appearing in the middle of the crowd and beaming upon them witha delighted smile. "Capitally, warmly said, wasn’t it? Bravo! And SergeyIvanovitch! Why, you ought to have said something—just a few words, youknow, to encourage them; you do that so well," he added with a soft,respectful, and discreet smile, moving Sergey Ivanovitch forward alittle by the arm.
"No, I’m just off."
"Where to?"
"To the country, to my brother’s," answered Sergey Ivanovitch.
"Then you’ll see my wife. I’ve written to her, but you’ll see her first.Please tell her that they’ve seen me and that it’s ‘all right,’ as theEnglish say. She’ll understand. Oh, and be so good as to tell her I’mappointed secretary of the committee.... But she’ll understand! Youknow, _les petites misères de la vie humaine,_" he said, as it wereapologizing to the princess. "And Princess Myakaya—not Liza, butBibish—is sending a thousand guns and twelve nurses. Did I tell you?"
"Yes, I heard so," answered Koznishev indifferently.
"It’s a pity you’re going away," said Stepan Arkadyevitch. "Tomorrowwe’re giving a dinner to two who’re setting off—Dimer-Bartnyansky fromPetersburg and our Veslovsky, Grisha. They’re both going. Veslovsky’sonly lately married. There’s a fine fellow for you! Eh, princess?" heturned to the lady.
The princess looked at Koznishev without replying. But the fact thatSergey Ivanovitch and the princess seemed anxious to get rid of him didnot in the least disconcert Stepan Arkadyevitch. Smiling, he stared atthe feather in the princess’s hat, and then about him as though he weregoing to pick something up. Seeing a lady approaching with a collectingbox, he beckoned her up and put in a five-rouble note.
"I can never see these collecting boxes unmoved while I’ve money in mypocket," he said. "And how about today’s telegram? Fine chaps thoseMontenegrins!"
"You don’t say so!" he cried, when the princess told him that Vronskywas going by this train. For an instant Stepan Arkadyevitch’s facelooked sad, but a minute later, when, stroking his mustaches andswinging as he walked, he went into the hall where Vronsky was, he hadcompletely forgotten his own despairing sobs over his sister’s corpse,and he saw in Vronsky only a hero and an old friend.
"With all his faults one can’t refuse to do him justice," said theprincess to Sergey Ivanovitch as soon as Stepan Arkadyevitch had leftthem. "What a typically Russian, Slav nature! Only, I’m afraid it won’tbe pleasant for Vronsky to see him. Say what you will, I’m touched bythat man’s fate. Do talk to him a little on the way," said the princess.
"Yes, perhaps, if it happens so."
"I never liked him. But this atones for a great deal. He’s not merelygoing himself, he’s taking a squadron at his own expense."
"Yes, so I heard."
A bell sounded. Everyone crowded to the doors. "Here he is!" said theprincess, indicating Vronsky, who with his mother on his arm walked by,wearing a long overcoat and wide-brimmed black hat. Oblonsky was walkingbeside him, talking eagerly of something.
Vronsky was frowning and looking straight before him, as though he didnot hear what Stepan Arkadyevitch was saying.
Probably on Oblonsky’s pointing them out, he looked round in thedirection where the princess and Sergey Ivanovitch were standing, andwithout speaking lifted his hat. His face, aged and worn by suffering,looked stony.
Going onto the platform, Vronsky left his mother and disappeared into acompartment.
On the platform there rang out "God save the Tsar," then shouts of"hurrah!" and _"jivio!"_ One of the volunteers, a tall, very young manwith a hollow chest, was particularly conspicuous, bowing and waving hisfelt hat and a nosegay over his head. Then two officers emerged, bowingtoo, and a stout man with a big beard, wearing a greasy forage cap.


Chapter 3

Saying good-bye to the princess, Sergey Ivanovitch was joined byKatavasov; together they got into a carriage full to overflowing, andthe train started.
At Tsaritsino station the train was met by a chorus of young men singing"Hail to Thee!" Again the volunteers bowed and poked their heads out,but Sergey Ivanovitch paid no attention to them. He had had so much todo with the volunteers that the type was familiar to him and did notinterest him. Katavasov, whose scientific work had prevented his havinga chance of observing them hitherto, was very much interested in themand questioned Sergey Ivanovitch.
Sergey Ivanovitch advised him to go into the second-class and talk tothem himself. At the next station Katavasov acted on this suggestion.
At the first stop he moved into the second-class and made theacquaintance of the volunteers. They were sitting in a corner of thecarriage, talking loudly and obviously aware that the attention of thepassengers and Katavasov as he got in was concentrated upon them. Moreloudly than all talked the tall, hollow-chested young man. He wasunmistakably tipsy, and was relating some story that had occurred at hisschool. Facing him sat a middle-aged officer in the Austrian militaryjacket of the Guards uniform. He was listening with a smile to thehollow-chested youth, and occasionally pulling him up. The third, in anartillery uniform, was sitting on a box beside them. A fourth wasasleep.
Entering into conversation with the youth, Katavasov learned that he wasa wealthy Moscow merchant who had run through a large fortune before hewas two-and-twenty. Katavasov did not like him, because he was unmanlyand effeminate and sickly. He was obviously convinced, especially nowafter drinking, that he was performing a heroic action, and he braggedof it in the most unpleasant way.
The second, the retired officer, made an unpleasant impression too uponKatavasov. He was, it seemed, a man who had tried everything. He hadbeen on a railway, had been a land-steward, and had started factories,and he talked, quite without necessity, of all he had done, and usedlearned expressions quite inappropriately.
The third, the artilleryman, on the contrary, struck Katavasov veryfavorably. He was a quiet, modest fellow, unmistakably impressed by theknowledge of the officer and the heroic self-sacrifice of the merchantand saying nothing about himself. When Katavasov asked him what hadimpelled him to go to Servia, he answered modestly:
"Oh, well, everyone’s going. The Servians want help, too. I’m sorry forthem."
"Yes, you artillerymen especially are scarce there," said Katavasov.
"Oh, I wasn’t long in the artillery, maybe they’ll put me into theinfantry or the cavalry."
"Into the infantry when they need artillery more than anything?" saidKatavasov, fancying from the artilleryman’s apparent age that he musthave reached a fairly high grade.
"I wasn’t long in the artillery; I’m a cadet retired," he said, and hebegan to explain how he had failed in his examination.
All of this together made a disagreeable impression on Katavasov, andwhen the volunteers got out at a station for a drink, Katavasov wouldhave liked to compare his unfavorable impression in conversation withsomeone. There was an old man in the carriage, wearing a militaryovercoat, who had been listening all the while to Katavasov’sconversation with the volunteers. When they were left alone, Katavasovaddressed him.
"What different positions they come from, all those fellows who aregoing off there," Katavasov said vaguely, not wishing to express his ownopinion, and at the same time anxious to find out the old man’s views.
The old man was an officer who had served on two campaigns. He knew whatmakes a soldier, and judging by the appearance and the talk of thosepersons, by the swagger with which they had recourse to the bottle onthe journey, he considered them poor soldiers. Moreover, he lived in adistrict town, and he was longing to tell how one soldier hadvolunteered from his town, a drunkard and a thief whom no one wouldemploy as a laborer. But knowing by experience that in the presentcondition of the public temper it was dangerous to express an opinionopposed to the general one, and especially to criticize the volunteersunfavorably, he too watched Katavasov without committing himself.
"Well, men are wanted there," he said, laughing with his eyes. And theyfell to talking of the last war news, and each concealed from the otherhis perplexity as to the engagement expected next day, since the Turkshad been beaten, according to the latest news, at all points. And sothey parted, neither giving expression to his opinion.
Katavasov went back to his own carriage, and with reluctant hypocrisyreported to Sergey Ivanovitch his observations of the volunteers, fromwhich it would appear that they were capital fellows.
At a big station at a town the volunteers were again greeted with shoutsand singing, again men and women with collecting boxes appeared, andprovincial ladies brought bouquets to the volunteers and followed theminto the refreshment room; but all this was on a much smaller andfeebler scale than in Moscow.


Chapter 4

While the train was stopping at the provincial town, Sergey Ivanovitchdid not go to the refreshment room, but walked up and down the platform.
The first time he passed Vronsky’s compartment he noticed that thecurtain was drawn over the window; but as he passed it the second timehe saw the old countess at the window. She beckoned to Koznishev.
"I’m going, you see, taking him as far as Kursk," she said.
"Yes, so I heard," said Sergey Ivanovitch, standing at her window andpeeping in. "What a noble act on his part!" he added, noticing thatVronsky was not in the compartment.
"Yes, after his misfortune, what was there for him to do?"
"What a terrible thing it was!" said Sergey Ivanovitch.
"Ah, what I have been through! But do get in.... Ah, what I have beenthrough!" she repeated, when Sergey Ivanovitch had got in and sat downbeside her. "You can’t conceive it! For six weeks he did not speak toanyone, and would not touch food except when I implored him. And not forone minute could we leave him alone. We took away everything he couldhave used against himself. We lived on the ground floor, but there wasno reckoning on anything. You know, of course, that he had shot himselfonce already on her account," she said, and the old lady’s eyelashestwitched at the recollection. "Yes, hers was the fitting end for such awoman. Even the death she chose was low and vulgar."
"It’s not for us to judge, countess," said Sergey Ivanovitch; "but I canunderstand that it has been very hard for you."
"Ah, don’t speak of it! I was staying on my estate, and he was with me.A note was brought him. He wrote an answer and sent it off. We hadn’t anidea that she was close by at the station. In the evening I had onlyjust gone to my room, when my Mary told me a lady had thrown herselfunder the train. Something seemed to strike me at once. I knew it wasshe. The first thing I said was, he was not to be told. But they’d toldhim already. His coachman was there and saw it all. When I ran into hisroom, he was beside himself—it was fearful to see him. He didn’t say aword, but galloped off there. I don’t know to this day what happenedthere, but he was brought back at death’s door. I shouldn’t have knownhim. _Prostration complete,_ the doctor said. And that was followedalmost by madness. Oh, why talk of it!" said the countess with a wave ofher hand. "It was an awful time! No, say what you will, she was a badwoman. Why, what is the meaning of such desperate passions? It was allto show herself something out of the way. Well, and that she did do. Shebrought herself to ruin and two good men—her husband and my unhappyson."
"And what did her husband do?" asked Sergey Ivanovitch.
"He has taken her daughter. Alexey was ready to agree to anything atfirst. Now it worries him terribly that he should have given his ownchild away to another man. But he can’t take back his word. Karenin cameto the funeral. But we tried to prevent his meeting Alexey. For him, forher husband, it was easier, anyway. She had set him free. But my poorson was utterly given up to her. He had thrown up everything, hiscareer, me, and even then she had no mercy on him, but of set purposeshe made his ruin complete. No, say what you will, her very death wasthe death of a vile woman, of no religious feeling. God forgive me, butI can’t help hating the memory of her, when I look at my son’s misery!"
"But how is he now?"
"It was a blessing from Providence for us—this Servian war. I’m old, andI don’t understand the rights and wrongs of it, but it’s come as aprovidential blessing to him. Of course for me, as his mother, it’sterrible; and what’s worse, they say, _ce n’est pas très bien vu aPétersbourg_. But it can’t be helped! It was the one thing that couldrouse him. Yashvin—a friend of his—he had lost all he had at cards andhe was going to Servia. He came to see him and persuaded him to go. Nowit’s an interest for him. Do please talk to him a little. I want todistract his mind. He’s so low-spirited. And as bad luck would have it,he has toothache too. But he’ll be delighted to see you. Please do talkto him; he’s walking up and down on that side."
Sergey Ivanovitch said he would be very glad to, and crossed over to theother side of the station.


Chapter 5

In the slanting evening shadows cast by the baggage piled up on theplatform, Vronsky in his long overcoat and slouch hat, with his hands inhis pockets, strode up and down, like a wild beast in a cage, turningsharply after twenty paces. Sergey Ivanovitch fancied, as he approachedhim, that Vronsky saw him but was pretending not to see. This did notaffect Sergey Ivanovitch in the slightest. He was above all personalconsiderations with Vronsky.
At that moment Sergey Ivanovitch looked upon Vronsky as a man taking animportant part in a great cause, and Koznishev thought it his duty toencourage him and express his approval. He went up to him.
Vronsky stood still, looked intently at him, recognized him, and going afew steps forward to meet him, shook hands with him very warmly.
"Possibly you didn’t wish to see me," said Sergey Ivanovitch, "butcouldn’t I be of use to you?"
"There’s no one I should less dislike seeing than you," said Vronsky."Excuse me; and there’s nothing in life for me to like."
"I quite understand, and I merely meant to offer you my services," saidSergey Ivanovitch, scanning Vronsky’s face, full of unmistakablesuffering. "Wouldn’t it be of use to you to have a letter to Ristitch—toMilan?"
"Oh, no!" Vronsky said, seeming to understand him with difficulty. "Ifyou don’t mind, let’s walk on. It’s so stuffy among the carriages. Aletter? No, thank you; to meet death one needs no letters ofintroduction. Nor for the Turks..." he said, with a smile that wasmerely of the lips. His eyes still kept their look of angry suffering.
"Yes; but you might find it easier to get into relations, which areafter all essential, with anyone prepared to see you. But that’s as youlike. I was very glad to hear of your intention. There have been so manyattacks made on the volunteers, and a man like you raises them in publicestimation."
"My use as a man," said Vronsky, "is that life’s worth nothing to me.And that I’ve enough bodily energy to cut my way into their ranks, andto trample on them or fall—I know that. I’m glad there’s something togive my life for, for it’s not simply useless but loathsome to me.Anyone’s welcome to it." And his jaw twitched impatiently from theincessant gnawing toothache, that prevented him from even speaking witha natural expression.
"You will become another man, I predict," said Sergey Ivanovitch,feeling touched. "To deliver one’s brother-men from bondage is an aimworth death and life. God grant you success outwardly—and inwardlypeace," he added, and he held out his hand. Vronsky warmly pressed hisoutstretched hand.
"Yes, as a weapon I may be of some use. But as a man, I’m a wreck," hejerked out.
He could hardly speak for the throbbing ache in his strong teeth, thatwere like rows of ivory in his mouth. He was silent, and his eyes restedon the wheels of the tender, slowly and smoothly rolling along therails.
And all at once a different pain, not an ache, but an inner trouble,that set his whole being in anguish, made him for an instant forget histoothache. As he glanced at the tender and the rails, under theinfluence of the conversation with a friend he had not met since hismisfortune, he suddenly recalled _her_—that is, what was left of herwhen he had run like one distraught into the cloak room of the railwaystation—on the table, shamelessly sprawling out among strangers, thebloodstained body so lately full of life; the head unhurt dropping backwith its weight of hair, and the curling tresses about the temples, andthe exquisite face, with red, half-opened mouth, the strange, fixedexpression, piteous on the lips and awful in the still open eyes, thatseemed to utter that fearful phrase—that he would be sorry for it—thatshe had said when they were quarreling.
And he tried to think of her as she was when he met her the first time,at a railway station too, mysterious, exquisite, loving, seeking andgiving happiness, and not cruelly revengeful as he remembered her onthat last moment. He tried to recall his best moments with her, butthose moments were poisoned forever. He could only think of her astriumphant, successful in her menace of a wholly useless remorse neverto be effaced. He lost all consciousness of toothache, and his faceworked with sobs.
Passing twice up and down beside the baggage in silence and regaininghis self-possession, he addressed Sergey Ivanovitch calmly:
"You have had no telegrams since yesterday’s? Yes, driven back for athird time, but a decisive engagement expected for tomorrow."
And after talking a little more of King Milan’s proclamation, and theimmense effect it might have, they parted, going to their carriages onhearing the second bell.


Chapter 6

Sergey Ivanovitch had not telegraphed to his brother to send to meethim, as he did not know when he should be able to leave Moscow. Levinwas not at home when Katavasov and Sergey Ivanovitch in a fly hired atthe station drove up to the steps of the Pokrovskoe house, as black asMoors from the dust of the road. Kitty, sitting on the balcony with herfather and sister, recognized her brother-in-law, and ran down to meethim.
"What a shame not to have let us know," she said, giving her hand toSergey Ivanovitch, and putting her forehead up for him to kiss.
"We drove here capitally, and have not put you out," answered SergeyIvanovitch. "I’m so dirty. I’m afraid to touch you. I’ve been so busy, Ididn’t know when I should be able to tear myself away. And so you’restill as ever enjoying your peaceful, quiet happiness," he said,smiling, "out of the reach of the current in your peaceful backwater.Here’s our friend Fyodor Vassilievitch who has succeeded in getting hereat last."
"But I’m not a negro, I shall look like a human being when I wash," saidKatavasov in his jesting fashion, and he shook hands and smiled, histeeth flashing white in his black face.
"Kostya will be delighted. He has gone to his settlement. It’s time heshould be home."
"Busy as ever with his farming. It really is a peaceful backwater," saidKatavasov; "while we in town think of nothing but the Servian war. Well,how does our friend look at it? He’s sure not to think like otherpeople."
"Oh, I don’t know, like everybody else," Kitty answered, a littleembarrassed, looking round at Sergey Ivanovitch. "I’ll send to fetchhim. Papa’s staying with us. He’s only just come home from abroad."
And making arrangements to send for Levin and for the guests to wash,one in his room and the other in what had been Dolly’s, and givingorders for their luncheon, Kitty ran out onto the balcony, enjoying thefreedom, and rapidity of movement, of which she had been deprived duringthe months of her pregnancy.
"It’s Sergey Ivanovitch and Katavasov, a professor," she said.
"Oh, that’s a bore in this heat," said the prince.
"No, papa, he’s very nice, and Kostya’s very fond of him," Kitty said,with a deprecating smile, noticing the irony on her father’s face.
"Oh, I didn’t say anything."
"You go to them, darling," said Kitty to her sister, "and entertainthem. They saw Stiva at the station; he was quite well. And I must runto Mitya. As ill-luck would have it, I haven’t fed him since tea. He’sawake now, and sure to be screaming." And feeling a rush of milk, shehurried to the nursery.
This was not a mere guess; her connection with the child was still soclose, that she could gauge by the flow of her milk his need of food,and knew for certain he was hungry.
She knew he was crying before she reached the nursery. And he was indeedcrying. She heard him and hastened. But the faster she went, the louderhe screamed. It was a fine healthy scream, hungry and impatient.
"Has he been screaming long, nurse, very long?" said Kitty hurriedly,seating herself on a chair, and preparing to give the baby the breast."But give me him quickly. Oh, nurse, how tiresome you are! There, tiethe cap afterwards, do!"
The baby’s greedy scream was passing into sobs.
"But you can’t manage so, ma’am," said Agafea Mihalovna, who was almostalways to be found in the nursery. "He must be put straight. A-oo!a-oo!" she chanted over him, paying no attention to the mother.
The nurse brought the baby to his mother. Agafea Mihalovna followed himwith a face dissolving with tenderness.
"He knows me, he knows me. In God’s faith, Katerina Alexandrovna, ma’am,he knew me!" Agafea Mihalovna cried above the baby’s screams.
But Kitty did not hear her words. Her impatience kept growing, like thebaby’s.
Their impatience hindered things for a while. The baby could not gethold of the breast right, and was furious.
At last, after despairing, breathless screaming, and vain sucking,things went right, and mother and child felt simultaneously soothed, andboth subsided into calm.
"But poor darling, he’s all in perspiration!" said Kitty in a whisper,touching the baby.
"What makes you think he knows you?" she added, with a sidelong glanceat the baby’s eyes, that peered roguishly, as she fancied, from underhis cap, at his rhythmically puffing cheeks, and the little red-palmedhand he was waving.
"Impossible! If he knew anyone, he would have known me," said Kitty, inresponse to Agafea Mihalovna’s statement, and she smiled.
She smiled because, though she said he could not know her, in her heartshe was sure that he knew not merely Agafea Mihalovna, but that he knewand understood everything, and knew and understood a great deal too thatno one else knew, and that she, his mother, had learned and come tounderstand only through him. To Agafea Mihalovna, to the nurse, to hisgrandfather, to his father even, Mitya was a living being, requiringonly material care, but for his mother he had long been a mortal being,with whom there had been a whole series of spiritual relations already.
"When he wakes up, please God, you shall see for yourself. Then when Ido like this, he simply beams on me, the darling! Simply beams like asunny day!" said Agafea Mihalovna.
"Well, well; then we shall see," whispered Kitty. "But now go away, he’sgoing to sleep."


Chapter 7

Agafea Mihalovna went out on tiptoe; the nurse let down the blind,chased a fly out from under the muslin canopy of the crib, and abumblebee struggling on the window-frame, and sat down waving a fadedbranch of birch over the mother and the baby.
"How hot it is! if God would send a drop of rain," she said.
"Yes, yes, sh—sh—sh—" was all Kitty answered, rocking a little, andtenderly squeezing the plump little arm, with rolls of fat at the wrist,which Mitya still waved feebly as he opened and shut his eyes. That handworried Kitty; she longed to kiss the little hand, but was afraid to forfear of waking the baby. At last the little hand ceased waving, and theeyes closed. Only from time to time, as he went on sucking, the babyraised his long, curly eyelashes and peeped at his mother with wet eyes,that looked black in the twilight. The nurse had left off fanning, andwas dozing. From above came the peals of the old prince’s voice, and thechuckle of Katavasov.
"They have got into talk without me," thought Kitty, "but still it’svexing that Kostya’s out. He’s sure to have gone to the bee house again.Though it’s a pity he’s there so often, still I’m glad. It distracts hismind. He’s become altogether happier and better now than in the spring.He used to be so gloomy and worried that I felt frightened for him. Andhow absurd he is!" she whispered, smiling.
She knew what worried her husband. It was his unbelief. Although, if shehad been asked whether she supposed that in the future life, if he didnot believe, he would be damned, she would have had to admit that hewould be damned, his unbelief did not cause her unhappiness. And she,confessing that for an unbeliever there can be no salvation, and lovingher husband’s soul more than anything in the world, thought with a smileof his unbelief, and told herself that he was absurd.
"What does he keep reading philosophy of some sort for all this year?"she wondered. "If it’s all written in those books, he can understandthem. If it’s all wrong, why does he read them? He says himself that hewould like to believe. Then why is it he doesn’t believe? Surely fromhis thinking so much? And he thinks so much from being solitary. He’salways alone, alone. He can’t talk about it all to us. I fancy he’ll beglad of these visitors, especially Katavasov. He likes discussions withthem," she thought, and passed instantly to the consideration of whereit would be more convenient to put Katavasov, to sleep alone or to shareSergey Ivanovitch’s room. And then an idea suddenly struck her, whichmade her shudder and even disturb Mitya, who glanced severely at her. "Ido believe the laundress hasn’t sent the washing yet, and all the bestsheets are in use. If I don’t see to it, Agafea Mihalovna will giveSergey Ivanovitch the wrong sheets," and at the very idea of this theblood rushed to Kitty’s face.
"Yes, I will arrange it," she decided, and going back to her formerthoughts, she remembered that some spiritual question of importance hadbeen interrupted, and she began to recall what. "Yes, Kostya, anunbeliever," she thought again with a smile.
"Well, an unbeliever then! Better let him always be one than like MadameStahl, or what I tried to be in those days abroad. No, he won’t eversham anything."
And a recent instance of his goodness rose vividly to her mind. Afortnight ago a penitent letter had come from Stepan Arkadyevitch toDolly. He besought her to save his honor, to sell her estate to pay hisdebts. Dolly was in despair, she detested her husband, despised him,pitied him, resolved on a separation, resolved to refuse, but ended byagreeing to sell part of her property. After that, with an irrepressiblesmile of tenderness, Kitty recalled her husband’s shamefacedembarrassment, his repeated awkward efforts to approach the subject, andhow at last, having thought of the one means of helping Dolly withoutwounding her pride, he had suggested to Kitty—what had not occurred toher before—that she should give up her share of the property.
"He an unbeliever indeed! With his heart, his dread of offending anyone,even a child! Everything for others, nothing for himself. SergeyIvanovitch simply considers it as Kostya’s duty to be his steward. Andit’s the same with his sister. Now Dolly and her children are under hisguardianship; all these peasants who come to him every day, as though hewere bound to be at their service."
"Yes, only be like your father, only like him," she said, handing Mityaover to the nurse, and putting her lips to his cheek.


Chapter 8

Ever since, by his beloved brother’s deathbed, Levin had first glancedinto the questions of life and death in the light of these newconvictions, as he called them, which had during the period from histwentieth to his thirty-fourth year imperceptibly replaced his childishand youthful beliefs—he had been stricken with horror, not so much ofdeath, as of life, without any knowledge of whence, and why, and how,and what it was. The physical organization, its decay, theindestructibility of matter, the law of the conservation of energy,evolution, were the words which usurped the place of his old belief.These words and the ideas associated with them were very well forintellectual purposes. But for life they yielded nothing, and Levin feltsuddenly like a man who has changed his warm fur cloak for a muslingarment, and going for the first time into the frost is immediatelyconvinced, not by reason, but by his whole nature that he is as good asnaked, and that he must infallibly perish miserably.
From that moment, though he did not distinctly face it, and still wenton living as before, Levin had never lost this sense of terror at hislack of knowledge.
He vaguely felt, too, that what he called his new convictions were notmerely lack of knowledge, but that they were part of a whole order ofideas, in which no knowledge of what he needed was possible.
At first, marriage, with the new joys and duties bound up with it, hadcompletely crowded out these thoughts. But of late, while he was stayingin Moscow after his wife’s confinement, with nothing to do, the questionthat clamored for solution had more and more often, more and moreinsistently, haunted Levin’s mind.
The question was summed up for him thus: "If I do not accept the answersChristianity gives to the problems of my life, what answers do Iaccept?" And in the whole arsenal of his convictions, so far fromfinding any satisfactory answers, he was utterly unable to find anythingat all like an answer.
He was in the position of a man seeking food in toy shops and toolshops.
Instinctively, unconsciously, with every book, with every conversation,with every man he met, he was on the lookout for light on thesequestions and their solution.
What puzzled and distracted him above everything was that the majorityof men of his age and circle had, like him, exchanged their old beliefsfor the same new convictions, and yet saw nothing to lament in this, andwere perfectly satisfied and serene. So that, apart from the principalquestion, Levin was tortured by other questions too. Were these peoplesincere? he asked himself, or were they playing a part? or was it thatthey understood the answers science gave to these problems in somedifferent, clearer sense than he did? And he assiduously studied boththese men’s opinions and the books which treated of these scientificexplanations.
One fact he had found out since these questions had engrossed his mind,was that he had been quite wrong in supposing from the recollections ofthe circle of his young days at college, that religion had outlived itsday, and that it was now practically non-existent. All the peoplenearest to him who were good in their lives were believers. The oldprince, and Lvov, whom he liked so much, and Sergey Ivanovitch, and allthe women believed, and his wife believed as simply as he had believedin his earliest childhood, and ninety-nine hundredths of the Russianpeople, all the working people for whose life he felt the deepestrespect, believed.
Another fact of which he became convinced, after reading many scientificbooks, was that the men who shared his views had no other constructionto put on them, and that they gave no explanation of the questions whichhe felt he could not live without answering, but simply ignored theirexistence and attempted to explain other questions of no possibleinterest to him, such as the evolution of organisms, the materialistictheory of consciousness, and so forth.
Moreover, during his wife’s confinement, something had happened thatseemed extraordinary to him. He, an unbeliever, had fallen into praying,and at the moment he prayed, he believed. But that moment had passed,and he could not make his state of mind at that moment fit into the restof his life.
He could not admit that at that moment he knew the truth, and that nowhe was wrong; for as soon as he began thinking calmly about it, it allfell to pieces. He could not admit that he was mistaken then, for hisspiritual condition then was precious to him, and to admit that it was aproof of weakness would have been to desecrate those moments. He wasmiserably divided against himself, and strained all his spiritual forcesto the utmost to escape from this condition.


Chapter 9

These doubts fretted and harassed him, growing weaker or stronger fromtime to time, but never leaving him. He read and thought, and the morehe read and the more he thought, the further he felt from the aim he waspursuing.
Of late in Moscow and in the country, since he had become convinced thathe would find no solution in the materialists, he had read and re-readthoroughly Plato, Spinoza, Kant, Schelling, Hegel, and Schopenhauer, thephilosophers who gave a non-materialistic explanation of life.
Their ideas seemed to him fruitful when he was reading or was himselfseeking arguments to refute other theories, especially those of thematerialists; but as soon as he began to read or sought for himself asolution of problems, the same thing always happened. As long as hefollowed the fixed definition of obscure words such as _spirit, will,freedom, essence,_ purposely letting himself go into the snare of wordsthe philosophers set for him, he seemed to comprehend something. But hehad only to forget the artificial train of reasoning, and to turn fromlife itself to what had satisfied him while thinking in accordance withthe fixed definitions, and all this artificial edifice fell to pieces atonce like a house of cards, and it became clear that the edifice hadbeen built up out of those transposed words, apart from anything in lifemore important than reason.
At one time, reading Schopenhauer, he put in place of his will the word_love_, and for a couple of days this new philosophy charmed him, tillhe removed a little away from it. But then, when he turned from lifeitself to glance at it again, it fell away too, and proved to be thesame muslin garment with no warmth in it.
His brother Sergey Ivanovitch advised him to read the theological worksof Homiakov. Levin read the second volume of Homiakov’s works, and inspite of the elegant, epigrammatic, argumentative style which at firstrepelled him, he was impressed by the doctrine of the church he found inthem. He was struck at first by the idea that the apprehension of divinetruths had not been vouchsafed to man, but to a corporation of men boundtogether by love—to the church. What delighted him was the thought howmuch easier it was to believe in a still existing living church,embracing all the beliefs of men, and having God at its head, andtherefore holy and infallible, and from it to accept the faith in God,in the creation, the fall, the redemption, than to begin with God, amysterious, far-away God, the creation, etc. But afterwards, on readinga Catholic writer’s history of the church, and then a Greek orthodoxwriter’s history of the church, and seeing that the two churches, intheir very conception infallible, each deny the authority of the other,Homiakov’s doctrine of the church lost all its charm for him, and thisedifice crumbled into dust like the philosophers’ edifices.
All that spring he was not himself, and went through fearful moments ofhorror.
"Without knowing what I am and why I am here, life’s impossible; andthat I can’t know, and so I can’t live," Levin said to himself.
"In infinite time, in infinite matter, in infinite space, is formed abubble-organism, and that bubble lasts a while and bursts, and thatbubble is Me."
It was an agonizing error, but it was the sole logical result of ages ofhuman thought in that direction.
This was the ultimate belief on which all the systems elaborated byhuman thought in almost all their ramifications rested. It was theprevalent conviction, and of all other explanations Levin hadunconsciously, not knowing when or how, chosen it, as anyway theclearest, and made it his own.
But it was not merely a falsehood, it was the cruel jeer of some wickedpower, some evil, hateful power, to whom one could not submit.
He must escape from this power. And the means of escape every man had inhis own hands. He had but to cut short this dependence on evil. Andthere was one means—death.
And Levin, a happy father and husband, in perfect health, was severaltimes so near suicide that he hid the cord that he might not be temptedto hang himself, and was afraid to go out with his gun for fear ofshooting himself.
But Levin did not shoot himself, and did not hang himself; he went onliving.


Chapter 10

When Levin thought what he was and what he was living for, he could findno answer to the questions and was reduced to despair, but he left offquestioning himself about it. It seemed as though he knew both what hewas and for what he was living, for he acted and lived resolutely andwithout hesitation. Indeed, in these latter days he was far more decidedand unhesitating in life than he had ever been.
When he went back to the country at the beginning of June, he went backalso to his usual pursuits. The management of the estate, his relationswith the peasants and the neighbors, the care of his household, themanagement of his sister’s and brother’s property, of which he had thedirection, his relations with his wife and kindred, the care of hischild, and the new bee-keeping hobby he had taken up that spring, filledall his time.
These things occupied him now, not because he justified them to himselfby any sort of general principles, as he had done in former days; on thecontrary, disappointed by the failure of his former efforts for thegeneral welfare, and too much occupied with his own thought and the massof business with which he was burdened from all sides, he had completelygiven up thinking of the general good, and he busied himself with allthis work simply because it seemed to him that he must do what he wasdoing—that he could not do otherwise. In former days—almost fromchildhood, and increasingly up to full manhood—when he had tried to doanything that would be good for all, for humanity, for Russia, for thewhole village, he had noticed that the idea of it had been pleasant, butthe work itself had always been incoherent, that then he had never had afull conviction of its absolute necessity, and that the work that hadbegun by seeming so great, had grown less and less, till it vanishedinto nothing. But now, since his marriage, when he had begun to confinehimself more and more to living for himself, though he experienced nodelight at all at the thought of the work he was doing, he felt acomplete conviction of its necessity, saw that it succeeded far betterthan in old days, and that it kept on growing more and more.
Now, involuntarily it seemed, he cut more and more deeply into the soillike a plough, so that he could not be drawn out without turning asidethe furrow.
To live the same family life as his father and forefathers—that is, inthe same condition of culture—and to bring up his children in the same,was incontestably necessary. It was as necessary as dining when one washungry. And to do this, just as it was necessary to cook dinner, it wasnecessary to keep the mechanism of agriculture at Pokrovskoe going so asto yield an income. Just as incontestably as it was necessary to repay adebt was it necessary to keep the property in such a condition that hisson, when he received it as a heritage, would say "thank you" to hisfather as Levin had said "thank you" to his grandfather for all he builtand planted. And to do this it was necessary to look after the landhimself, not to let it, and to breed cattle, manure the fields, andplant timber.
It was impossible not to look after the affairs of Sergey Ivanovitch, ofhis sister, of the peasants who came to him for advice and wereaccustomed to do so—as impossible as to fling down a child one iscarrying in one’s arms. It was necessary to look after the comfort ofhis sister-in-law and her children, and of his wife and baby, and it wasimpossible not to spend with them at least a short time each day.
And all this, together with shooting and his new bee-keeping, filled upthe whole of Levin’s life, which had no meaning at all for him, when hebegan to think.
But besides knowing thoroughly what he had to do, Levin knew in just thesame way _how_ he had to do it all, and what was more important than therest.
He knew he must hire laborers as cheaply as possible; but to hire menunder bond, paying them in advance at less than the current rate ofwages, was what he must not do, even though it was very profitable.Selling straw to the peasants in times of scarcity of provender was whathe might do, even though he felt sorry for them; but the tavern and thepothouse must be put down, though they were a source of income. Fellingtimber must be punished as severely as possible, but he could not exactforfeits for cattle being driven onto his fields; and though it annoyedthe keeper and made the peasants not afraid to graze their cattle on hisland, he could not keep their cattle as a punishment.
To Pyotr, who was paying a money-lender 10 per cent. a month, he mustlend a sum of money to set him free. But he could not let off peasantswho did not pay their rent, nor let them fall into arrears. It wasimpossible to overlook the bailiff’s not having mown the meadows andletting the hay spoil; and it was equally impossible to mow those acreswhere a young copse had been planted. It was impossible to excuse alaborer who had gone home in the busy season because his father wasdying, however sorry he might feel for him, and he must subtract fromhis pay those costly months of idleness. But it was impossible not toallow monthly rations to the old servants who were of no use foranything.
Levin knew that when he got home he must first of all go to his wife,who was unwell, and that the peasants who had been waiting for threehours to see him could wait a little longer. He knew too that,regardless of all the pleasure he felt in taking a swarm, he must foregothat pleasure, and leave the old man to see to the bees alone, while hetalked to the peasants who had come after him to the bee-house.
Whether he were acting rightly or wrongly he did not know, and far fromtrying to prove that he was, nowadays he avoided all thought or talkabout it.
Reasoning had brought him to doubt, and prevented him from seeing whathe ought to do and what he ought not. When he did not think, but simplylived, he was continually aware of the presence of an infallible judgein his soul, determining which of two possible courses of action was thebetter and which was the worse, and as soon as he did not act rightly,he was at once aware of it.
So he lived, not knowing and not seeing any chance of knowing what hewas and what he was living for, and harassed at this lack of knowledgeto such a point that he was afraid of suicide, and yet firmly layingdown his own individual definite path in life.


Chapter 11

The day on which Sergey Ivanovitch came to Pokrovskoe was one of Levin’smost painful days. It was the very busiest working time, when all thepeasantry show an extraordinary intensity of self-sacrifice in labor,such as is never shown in any other conditions of life, and would behighly esteemed if the men who showed these qualities themselves thoughthighly of them, and if it were not repeated every year, and if theresults of this intense labor were not so simple.
To reap and bind the rye and oats and to carry it, to mow the meadows,turn over the fallows, thrash the seed and sow the winter corn—all thisseems so simple and ordinary; but to succeed in getting through it alleveryone in the village, from the old man to the young child, must toilincessantly for three or four weeks, three times as hard as usual,living on rye-beer, onions, and black bread, thrashing and carrying thesheaves at night, and not giving more than two or three hours in thetwenty-four to sleep. And every year this is done all over Russia.
Having lived the greater part of his life in the country and in theclosest relations with the peasants, Levin always felt in this busy timethat he was infected by this general quickening of energy in the people.
In the early morning he rode over to the first sowing of the rye, and tothe oats, which were being carried to the stacks, and returning home atthe time his wife and sister-in-law were getting up, he drank coffeewith them and walked to the farm, where a new thrashing machine was tobe set working to get ready the seed-corn.
He was standing in the cool granary, still fragrant with the leaves ofthe hazel branches interlaced on the freshly peeled aspen beams of thenew thatch roof. He gazed through the open door in which the dry bitterdust of the thrashing whirled and played, at the grass of the thrashingfloor in the sunlight and the fresh straw that had been brought in fromthe barn, then at the speckly-headed, white-breasted swallows that flewchirping in under the roof and, fluttering their wings, settled in thecrevices of the doorway, then at the peasants bustling in the dark,dusty barn, and he thought strange thoughts.
"Why is it all being done?" he thought. "Why am I standing here, makingthem work? What are they all so busy for, trying to show their zealbefore me? What is that old Matrona, my old friend, toiling for? (Idoctored her, when the beam fell on her in the fire)" he thought,looking at a thin old woman who was raking up the grain, movingpainfully with her bare, sun-blackened feet over the uneven, roughfloor. "Then she recovered, but today or tomorrow or in ten years shewon’t; they’ll bury her, and nothing will be left either of her or ofthat smart girl in the red jacket, who with that skillful, soft actionshakes the ears out of their husks. They’ll bury her and this piebaldhorse, and very soon too," he thought, gazing at the heavily moving,panting horse that kept walking up the wheel that turned under him. "Andthey will bury her and Fyodor the thrasher with his curly beard full ofchaff and his shirt torn on his white shoulders—they will bury him. He’suntying the sheaves, and giving orders, and shouting to the women, andquickly setting straight the strap on the moving wheel. And what’s more,it’s not them alone—me they’ll bury too, and nothing will be left. Whatfor?"
He thought this, and at the same time looked at his watch to reckon howmuch they thrashed in an hour. He wanted to know this so as to judge byit the task to set for the day.
"It’ll soon be one, and they’re only beginning the third sheaf," thoughtLevin. He went up to the man that was feeding the machine, and shoutingover the roar of the machine he told him to put it in more slowly. "Youput in too much at a time, Fyodor. Do you see—it gets choked, that’s whyit isn’t getting on. Do it evenly."
Fyodor, black with the dust that clung to his moist face, shoutedsomething in response, but still went on doing it as Levin did not wanthim to.
Levin, going up to the machine, moved Fyodor aside, and began feedingthe corn in himself. Working on till the peasants’ dinner hour, whichwas not long in coming, he went out of the barn with Fyodor and fellinto talk with him, stopping beside a neat yellow sheaf of rye laid onthe thrashing floor for seed.
Fyodor came from a village at some distance from the one in which Levinhad once allotted land to his cooperative association. Now it had beenlet to a former house porter.
Levin talked to Fyodor about this land and asked whether Platon, awell-to-do peasant of good character belonging to the same village,would not take the land for the coming year.
"It’s a high rent; it wouldn’t pay Platon, Konstantin Dmitrievitch,"answered the peasant, picking the ears off his sweat-drenched shirt.
"But how does Kirillov make it pay?"
"Mituh!" (so the peasant called the house porter, in a tone ofcontempt), "you may be sure he’ll make it pay, Konstantin Dmitrievitch!He’ll get his share, however he has to squeeze to get it! He’s no mercyon a Christian. But Uncle Fokanitch" (so he called the old peasantPlaton), "do you suppose he’d flay the skin off a man? Where there’sdebt, he’ll let anyone off. And he’ll not wring the last penny out. He’sa man too."
"But why will he let anyone off?"
"Oh, well, of course, folks are different. One man lives for his ownwants and nothing else, like Mituh, he only thinks of filling his belly,but Fokanitch is a righteous man. He lives for his soul. He does notforget God."
"How thinks of God? How does he live for his soul?" Levin almostshouted.
"Why, to be sure, in truth, in God’s way. Folks are different. Take younow, you wouldn’t wrong a man...."
"Yes, yes, good-bye!" said Levin, breathless with excitement, andturning round he took his stick and walked quickly away towards home. Atthe peasant’s words that Fokanitch lived for his soul, in truth, inGod’s way, undefined but significant ideas seemed to burst out as thoughthey had been locked up, and all striving towards one goal, theythronged whirling through his head, blinding him with their light.


Chapter 12

Levin strode along the highroad, absorbed not so much in his thoughts(he could not yet disentangle them) as in his spiritual condition,unlike anything he had experienced before.
The words uttered by the peasant had acted on his soul like an electricshock, suddenly transforming and combining into a single whole the wholeswarm of disjointed, impotent, separate thoughts that incessantlyoccupied his mind. These thoughts had unconsciously been in his mindeven when he was talking about the land.
He was aware of something new in his soul, and joyfully tested this newthing, not yet knowing what it was.
"Not living for his own wants, but for God? For what God? And could onesay anything more senseless than what he said? He said that one must notlive for one’s own wants, that is, that one must not live for what weunderstand, what we are attracted by, what we desire, but must live forsomething incomprehensible, for God, whom no one can understand nor evendefine. What of it? Didn’t I understand those senseless words ofFyodor’s? And understanding them, did I doubt of their truth? Did Ithink them stupid, obscure, inexact? No, I understood him, and exactlyas he understands the words. I understood them more fully and clearlythan I understand anything in life, and never in my life have I doubtednor can I doubt about it. And not only I, but everyone, the whole worldunderstands nothing fully but this, and about this only they have nodoubt and are always agreed.
"And I looked out for miracles, complained that I did not see a miraclewhich would convince me. A material miracle would have persuaded me. Andhere is a miracle, the sole miracle possible, continually existing,surrounding me on all sides, and I never noticed it!
"Fyodor says that Kirillov lives for his belly. That’s comprehensibleand rational. All of us as rational beings can’t do anything else butlive for our belly. And all of a sudden the same Fyodor says that onemustn’t live for one’s belly, but must live for truth, for God, and at ahint I understand him! And I and millions of men, men who lived ages agoand men living now—peasants, the poor in spirit and the learned, whohave thought and written about it, in their obscure words saying thesame thing—we are all agreed about this one thing: what we must live forand what is good. I and all men have only one firm, incontestable, clearknowledge, and that knowledge cannot be explained by the reason—it isoutside it, and has no causes and can have no effects.
"If goodness has causes, it is not goodness; if it has effects, areward, it is not goodness either. So goodness is outside the chain ofcause and effect.
"And yet I know it, and we all know it.
"What could be a greater miracle than that?
"Can I have found the solution of it all? can my sufferings be over?"thought Levin, striding along the dusty road, not noticing the heat norhis weariness, and experiencing a sense of relief from prolongedsuffering. This feeling was so delicious that it seemed to himincredible. He was breathless with emotion and incapable of goingfarther; he turned off the road into the forest and lay down in theshade of an aspen on the uncut grass. He took his hat off his hot headand lay propped on his elbow in the lush, feathery, woodland grass.
"Yes, I must make it clear to myself and understand," he thought,looking intently at the untrampled grass before him, and following themovements of a green beetle, advancing along a blade of couch-grass andlifting up in its progress a leaf of goat-weed. "What have Idiscovered?" he asked himself, bending aside the leaf of goat-weed outof the beetle’s way and twisting another blade of grass above for thebeetle to cross over onto it. "What is it makes me glad? What have Idiscovered?
"I have discovered nothing. I have only found out what I knew. Iunderstand the force that in the past gave me life, and now too gives melife. I have been set free from falsity, I have found the Master.
"Of old I used to say that in my body, that in the body of this grassand of this beetle (there, she didn’t care for the grass, she’s openedher wings and flown away), there was going on a transformation of matterin accordance with physical, chemical, and physiological laws. And inall of us, as well as in the aspens and the clouds and the mistypatches, there was a process of evolution. Evolution from what? intowhat?—Eternal evolution and struggle.... As though there could be anysort of tendency and struggle in the eternal! And I was astonished thatin spite of the utmost effort of thought along that road I could notdiscover the meaning of life, the meaning of my impulses and yearnings.Now I say that I know the meaning of my life: ‘To live for God, for mysoul.’ And this meaning, in spite of its clearness, is mysterious andmarvelous. Such, indeed, is the meaning of everything existing. Yes,pride," he said to himself, turning over on his stomach and beginning totie a noose of blades of grass, trying not to break them.
"And not merely pride of intellect, but dulness of intellect. And mostof all, the deceitfulness; yes, the deceitfulness of intellect. Thecheating knavishness of intellect, that’s it," he said to himself.
And he briefly went through, mentally, the whole course of his ideasduring the last two years, the beginning of which was the clearconfronting of death at the sight of his dear brother hopelessly ill.
Then, for the first time, grasping that for every man, and himself too,there was nothing in store but suffering, death, and forgetfulness, hehad made up his mind that life was impossible like that, and that hemust either interpret life so that it would not present itself to him asthe evil jest of some devil, or shoot himself.
But he had not done either, but had gone on living, thinking, andfeeling, and had even at that very time married, and had had many joysand had been happy, when he was not thinking of the meaning of his life.
What did this mean? It meant that he had been living rightly, butthinking wrongly.
He had lived (without being aware of it) on those spiritual truths thathe had sucked in with his mother’s milk, but he had thought, not merelywithout recognition of these truths, but studiously ignoring them.
Now it was clear to him that he could only live by virtue of the beliefsin which he had been brought up.
"What should I have been, and how should I have spent my life, if I hadnot had these beliefs, if I had not known that I must live for God andnot for my own desires? I should have robbed and lied and killed.Nothing of what makes the chief happiness of my life would have existedfor me." And with the utmost stretch of imagination he could notconceive the brutal creature he would have been himself, if he had notknown what he was living for.
"I looked for an answer to my question. And thought could not give ananswer to my question—it is incommensurable with my question. The answerhas been given me by life itself, in my knowledge of what is right andwhat is wrong. And that knowledge I did not arrive at in any way, it wasgiven to me as to all men, _given_, because I could not have got it fromanywhere.
"Where could I have got it? By reason could I have arrived at knowingthat I must love my neighbor and not oppress him? I was told that in mychildhood, and I believed it gladly, for they told me what was alreadyin my soul. But who discovered it? Not reason. Reason discovered thestruggle for existence, and the law that requires us to oppress all whohinder the satisfaction of our desires. That is the deduction of reason.But loving one’s neighbor reason could never discover, because it’sirrational."


Chapter 13

And Levin remembered a scene he had lately witnessed between Dolly andher children. The children, left to themselves, had begun cookingraspberries over the candles and squirting milk into each other’s mouthswith a syringe. Their mother, catching them at these pranks, beganreminding them in Levin’s presence of the trouble their mischief gave tothe grown-up people, and that this trouble was all for their sake, andthat if they smashed the cups they would have nothing to drink their teaout of, and that if they wasted the milk, they would have nothing toeat, and die of hunger.
And Levin had been struck by the passive, weary incredulity with whichthe children heard what their mother said to them. They were simplyannoyed that their amusing play had been interrupted, and did notbelieve a word of what their mother was saying. They could not believeit indeed, for they could not take in the immensity of all theyhabitually enjoyed, and so could not conceive that what they weredestroying was the very thing they lived by.
"That all comes of itself," they thought, "and there’s nothinginteresting or important about it because it has always been so, andalways will be so. And it’s all always the same. We’ve no need to thinkabout that, it’s all ready. But we want to invent something of our own,and new. So we thought of putting raspberries in a cup, and cooking themover a candle, and squirting milk straight into each other’s mouths.That’s fun, and something new, and not a bit worse than drinking out ofcups."
"Isn’t it just the same that we do, that I did, searching by the aid ofreason for the significance of the forces of nature and the meaning ofthe life of man?" he thought.
"And don’t all the theories of philosophy do the same, trying by thepath of thought, which is strange and not natural to man, to bring himto a knowledge of what he has known long ago, and knows so certainlythat he could not live at all without it? Isn’t it distinctly to be seenin the development of each philosopher’s theory, that he knows what isthe chief significance of life beforehand, just as positively as thepeasant Fyodor, and not a bit more clearly than he, and is simply tryingby a dubious intellectual path to come back to what everyone knows?
"Now then, leave the children to themselves to get things alone and maketheir crockery, get the milk from the cows, and so on. Would they benaughty then? Why, they’d die of hunger! Well, then, leave us with ourpassions and thoughts, without any idea of the one God, of the Creator,or without any idea of what is right, without any idea of moral evil.
"Just try and build up anything without those ideas!
"We only try to destroy them, because we’re spiritually provided for.Exactly like the children!
"Whence have I that joyful knowledge, shared with the peasant, thatalone gives peace to my soul? Whence did I get it?
"Brought up with an idea of God, a Christian, my whole life filled withthe spiritual blessings Christianity has given me, full of them, andliving on those blessings, like the children I did not understand them,and destroy, that is try to destroy, what I live by. And as soon as animportant moment of life comes, like the children when they are cold andhungry, I turn to Him, and even less than the children when their motherscolds them for their childish mischief, do I feel that my childishefforts at wanton madness are reckoned against me.
"Yes, what I know, I know not by reason, but it has been given to me,revealed to me, and I know it with my heart, by faith in the chief thingtaught by the church.
"The church! the church!" Levin repeated to himself. He turned over onthe other side, and leaning on his elbow, fell to gazing into thedistance at a herd of cattle crossing over to the river.
"But can I believe in all the church teaches?" he thought, tryinghimself, and thinking of everything that could destroy his present peaceof mind. Intentionally he recalled all those doctrines of the churchwhich had always seemed most strange and had always been a stumblingblock to him.
"The Creation? But how did I explain existence? By existence? Bynothing? The devil and sin. But how do I explain evil?... Theatonement?...
"But I know nothing, nothing, and I can know nothing but what has beentold to me and all men."
And it seemed to him that there was not a single article of faith of thechurch which could destroy the chief thing—faith in God, in goodness, asthe one goal of man’s destiny.
Under every article of faith of the church could be put the faith in theservice of truth instead of one’s desires. And each doctrine did notsimply leave that faith unshaken, each doctrine seemed essential tocomplete that great miracle, continually manifest upon earth, that madeit possible for each man and millions of different sorts of men, wisemen and imbeciles, old men and children—all men, peasants, Lvov, Kitty,beggars and kings to understand perfectly the same one thing, and tobuild up thereby that life of the soul which alone is worth living, andwhich alone is precious to us.
Lying on his back, he gazed up now into the high, cloudless sky. "Do Inot know that that is infinite space, and that it is not a round arch?But, however I screw up my eyes and strain my sight, I cannot see it notround and not bounded, and in spite of my knowing about infinite space,I am incontestably right when I see a solid blue dome, and more rightthan when I strain my eyes to see beyond it."
Levin ceased thinking, and only, as it were, listened to mysteriousvoices that seemed talking joyfully and earnestly within him.
"Can this be faith?" he thought, afraid to believe in his happiness. "MyGod, I thank Thee!" he said, gulping down his sobs, and with both handsbrushing away the tears that filled his eyes.


Chapter 14

Levin looked before him and saw a herd of cattle, then he caught sightof his trap with Raven in the shafts, and the coachman, who, driving upto the herd, said something to the herdsman. Then he heard the rattle ofthe wheels and the snort of the sleek horse close by him. But he was soburied in his thoughts that he did not even wonder why the coachman hadcome for him.
He only thought of that when the coachman had driven quite up to him andshouted to him. "The mistress sent me. Your brother has come, and somegentleman with him."
Levin got into the trap and took the reins. As though just roused out ofsleep, for a long while Levin could not collect his faculties. He staredat the sleek horse flecked with lather between his haunches and on hisneck, where the harness rubbed, stared at Ivan the coachman sittingbeside him, and remembered that he was expecting his brother, thoughtthat his wife was most likely uneasy at his long absence, and tried toguess who was the visitor who had come with his brother. And his brotherand his wife and the unknown guest seemed to him now quite differentfrom before. He fancied that now his relations with all men would bedifferent.
"With my brother there will be none of that aloofness there always usedto be between us, there will be no disputes; with Kitty there shallnever be quarrels; with the visitor, whoever he may be, I will befriendly and nice; with the servants, with Ivan, it will all bedifferent."
Pulling the stiff rein and holding in the good horse that snorted withimpatience and seemed begging to be let go, Levin looked round at Ivansitting beside him, not knowing what to do with his unoccupied hand,continually pressing down his shirt as it puffed out, and he tried tofind something to start a conversation about with him. He would havesaid that Ivan had pulled the saddle-girth up too high, but that waslike blame, and he longed for friendly, warm talk. Nothing else occurredto him.
"Your honor must keep to the right and mind that stump," said thecoachman, pulling the rein Levin held.
"Please don’t touch and don’t teach me!" said Levin, angered by thisinterference. Now, as always, interference made him angry, and he feltsorrowfully at once how mistaken had been his supposition that hisspiritual condition could immediately change him in contact withreality.
He was not a quarter of a mile from home when he saw Grisha and Tanyarunning to meet him.
"Uncle Kostya! mamma’s coming, and grandfather, and Sergey Ivanovitch,and someone else," they said, clambering up into the trap.
"Who is he?"
"An awfully terrible person! And he does like this with his arms," saidTanya, getting up in the trap and mimicking Katavasov.
"Old or young?" asked Levin, laughing, reminded of someone, he did notknow whom, by Tanya’s performance.
"Oh, I hope it’s not a tiresome person!" thought Levin.
As soon as he turned, at a bend in the road, and saw the party coming,Levin recognized Katavasov in a straw hat, walking along swinging hisarms just as Tanya had shown him. Katavasov was very fond of discussingmetaphysics, having derived his notions from natural science writers whohad never studied metaphysics, and in Moscow Levin had had manyarguments with him of late.
And one of these arguments, in which Katavasov had obviously consideredthat he came off victorious, was the first thing Levin thought of as herecognized him.
"No, whatever I do, I won’t argue and give utterance to my ideaslightly," he thought.
Getting out of the trap and greeting his brother and Katavasov, Levinasked about his wife.
"She has taken Mitya to Kolok" (a copse near the house). "She meant tohave him out there because it’s so hot indoors," said Dolly. Levin hadalways advised his wife not to take the baby to the wood, thinking itunsafe, and he was not pleased to hear this.
"She rushes about from place to place with him," said the prince,smiling. "I advised her to try putting him in the ice cellar."
"She meant to come to the bee house. She thought you would be there. Weare going there," said Dolly.
"Well, and what are you doing?" said Sergey Ivanovitch, falling backfrom the rest and walking beside him.
"Oh, nothing special. Busy as usual with the land," answered Levin."Well, and what about you? Come for long? We have been expecting you forsuch a long time."
"Only for a fortnight. I’ve a great deal to do in Moscow."
At these words the brothers’ eyes met, and Levin, in spite of the desirehe always had, stronger than ever just now, to be on affectionate andstill more open terms with his brother, felt an awkwardness in lookingat him. He dropped his eyes and did not know what to say.
Casting over the subjects of conversation that would be pleasant toSergey Ivanovitch, and would keep him off the subject of the Servian warand the Slavonic question, at which he had hinted by the allusion towhat he had to do in Moscow, Levin began to talk of Sergey Ivanovitch’sbook.
"Well, have there been reviews of your book?" he asked.
Sergey Ivanovitch smiled at the intentional character of the question.
"No one is interested in that now, and I less than anyone," he said."Just look, Darya Alexandrovna, we shall have a shower," he added,pointing with a sunshade at the white rain clouds that showed above theaspen tree-tops.
And these words were enough to re-establish again between the brothersthat tone—hardly hostile, but chilly—which Levin had been so longing toavoid.
Levin went up to Katavasov.
"It was jolly of you to make up your mind to come," he said to him.
"I’ve been meaning to a long while. Now we shall have some discussion,we’ll see to that. Have you been reading Spencer?"
"No, I’ve not finished reading him," said Levin. "But I don’t need himnow."
"How’s that? that’s interesting. Why so?"
"I mean that I’m fully convinced that the solution of the problems thatinterest me I shall never find in him and his like. Now..."
But Katavasov’s serene and good-humored expression suddenly struck him,and he felt such tenderness for his own happy mood, which he wasunmistakably disturbing by this conversation, that he remembered hisresolution and stopped short.
"But we’ll talk later on," he added. "If we’re going to the bee house,it’s this way, along this little path," he said, addressing them all.
Going along the narrow path to a little uncut meadow covered on one sidewith thick clumps of brilliant heart’s-ease among which stood up hereand there tall, dark green tufts of hellebore, Levin settled his guestsin the dense, cool shade of the young aspens on a bench and some stumpspurposely put there for visitors to the bee house who might be afraid ofthe bees, and he went off himself to the hut to get bread, cucumbers,and fresh honey, to regale them with.
Trying to make his movements as deliberate as possible, and listening tothe bees that buzzed more and more frequently past him, he walked alongthe little path to the hut. In the very entry one bee hummed angrily,caught in his beard, but he carefully extricated it. Going into theshady outer room, he took down from the wall his veil, that hung on apeg, and putting it on, and thrusting his hands into his pockets, hewent into the fenced-in bee-garden, where there stood in the midst of aclosely mown space in regular rows, fastened with bast on posts, all thehives he knew so well, the old stocks, each with its own history, andalong the fences the younger swarms hived that year. In front of theopenings of the hives, it made his eyes giddy to watch the bees anddrones whirling round and round about the same spot, while among themthe working bees flew in and out with spoils or in search of them,always in the same direction into the wood to the flowering lime treesand back to the hives.
His ears were filled with the incessant hum in various notes, now thebusy hum of the working bee flying quickly off, then the blaring of thelazy drone, and the excited buzz of the bees on guard protecting theirproperty from the enemy and preparing to sting. On the farther side ofthe fence the old bee-keeper was shaving a hoop for a tub, and he didnot see Levin. Levin stood still in the midst of the beehives and didnot call him.
He was glad of a chance to be alone to recover from the influence ofordinary actual life, which had already depressed his happy mood. Hethought that he had already had time to lose his temper with Ivan, toshow coolness to his brother, and to talk flippantly with Katavasov.
"Can it have been only a momentary mood, and will it pass and leave notrace?" he thought. But the same instant, going back to his mood, hefelt with delight that something new and important had happened to him.Real life had only for a time overcast the spiritual peace he had found,but it was still untouched within him.
Just as the bees, whirling round him, now menacing him and distractinghis attention, prevented him from enjoying complete physical peace,forced him to restrain his movements to avoid them, so had the pettycares that had swarmed about him from the moment he got into the traprestricted his spiritual freedom; but that lasted only so long as he wasamong them. Just as his bodily strength was still unaffected, in spiteof the bees, so too was the spiritual strength that he had just becomeaware of.


Chapter 15

"Do you know, Kostya, with whom Sergey Ivanovitch traveled on his wayhere?" said Dolly, doling out cucumbers and honey to the children; "withVronsky! He’s going to Servia."
"And not alone; he’s taking a squadron out with him at his own expense,"said Katavasov.
"That’s the right thing for him," said Levin. "Are volunteers stillgoing out then?" he added, glancing at Sergey Ivanovitch.
Sergey Ivanovitch did not answer. He was carefully with a blunt knifegetting a live bee covered with sticky honey out of a cup full of whitehoneycomb.
"I should think so! You should have seen what was going on at thestation yesterday!" said Katavasov, biting with a juicy sound into acucumber.
"Well, what is one to make of it? For mercy’s sake, do explain to me,Sergey Ivanovitch, where are all those volunteers going, whom are theyfighting with?" asked the old prince, unmistakably taking up aconversation that had sprung up in Levin’s absence.
"With the Turks," Sergey Ivanovitch answered, smiling serenely, as heextricated the bee, dark with honey and helplessly kicking, and put itwith the knife on a stout aspen leaf.
"But who has declared war on the Turks?—Ivan Ivanovitch Ragozov andCountess Lidia Ivanovna, assisted by Madame Stahl?"
"No one has declared war, but people sympathize with their neighbors’sufferings and are eager to help them," said Sergey Ivanovitch.
"But the prince is not speaking of help," said Levin, coming to theassistance of his father-in-law, "but of war. The prince says thatprivate persons cannot take part in war without the permission of thegovernment."
"Kostya, mind, that’s a bee! Really, they’ll sting us!" said Dolly,waving away a wasp.
"But that’s not a bee, it’s a wasp," said Levin.
"Well now, well, what’s your own theory?" Katavasov said to Levin with asmile, distinctly challenging him to a discussion. "Why have not privatepersons the right to do so?"
"Oh, my theory’s this: war is on one side such a beastly, cruel, andawful thing, that no one man, not to speak of a Christian, canindividually take upon himself the responsibility of beginning wars;that can only be done by a government, which is called upon to do this,and is driven inevitably into war. On the other hand, both politicalscience and common sense teach us that in matters of state, andespecially in the matter of war, private citizens must forego theirpersonal individual will."
Sergey Ivanovitch and Katavasov had their replies ready, and both beganspeaking at the same time.
"But the point is, my dear fellow, that there may be cases when thegovernment does not carry out the will of the citizens and then thepublic asserts its will," said Katavasov.
But evidently Sergey Ivanovitch did not approve of this answer. Hisbrows contracted at Katavasov’s words and he said something else.
"You don’t put the matter in its true light. There is no question hereof a declaration of war, but simply the expression of a human Christianfeeling. Our brothers, one with us in religion and in race, are beingmassacred. Even supposing they were not our brothers norfellow-Christians, but simply children, women, old people, feeling isaroused and Russians go eagerly to help in stopping these atrocities.Fancy, if you were going along the street and saw drunken men beating awoman or a child—I imagine you would not stop to inquire whether war hadbeen declared on the men, but would throw yourself on them, and protectthe victim."
"But I should not kill them," said Levin.
"Yes, you would kill them."
"I don’t know. If I saw that, I might give way to my impulse of themoment, but I can’t say beforehand. And such a momentary impulse thereis not, and there cannot be, in the case of the oppression of theSlavonic peoples."
"Possibly for you there is not; but for others there is," said SergeyIvanovitch, frowning with displeasure. "There are traditions stillextant among the people of Slavs of the true faith suffering under theyoke of the ‘unclean sons of Hagar.’ The people have heard of thesufferings of their brethren and have spoken."
"Perhaps so," said Levin evasively; "but I don’t see it. I’m one of thepeople myself, and I don’t feel it."
"Here am I too," said the old prince. "I’ve been staying abroad andreading the papers, and I must own, up to the time of the Bulgarianatrocities, I couldn’t make out why it was all the Russians were all ofa sudden so fond of their Slavonic brethren, while I didn’t feel theslightest affection for them. I was very much upset, thought I was amonster, or that it was the influence of Carlsbad on me. But since Ihave been here, my mind’s been set at rest. I see that there are peoplebesides me who’re only interested in Russia, and not in their Slavonicbrethren. Here’s Konstantin too."
"Personal opinions mean nothing in such a case," said Sergey Ivanovitch;"it’s not a matter of personal opinions when all Russia—the wholepeople—has expressed its will."
"But excuse me, I don’t see that. The people don’t know anything aboutit, if you come to that," said the old prince.
"Oh, papa!... how can you say that? And last Sunday in church?" saidDolly, listening to the conversation. "Please give me a cloth," she saidto the old man, who was looking at the children with a smile. "Why, it’snot possible that all..."
"But what was it in church on Sunday? The priest had been told to readthat. He read it. They didn’t understand a word of it. Then they weretold that there was to be a collection for a pious object in church;well, they pulled out their halfpence and gave them, but what for theycouldn’t say."
"The people cannot help knowing; the sense of their own destinies isalways in the people, and at such moments as the present that sensefinds utterance," said Sergey Ivanovitch with conviction, glancing atthe old bee-keeper.
The handsome old man, with black grizzled beard and thick silvery hair,stood motionless, holding a cup of honey, looking down from the heightof his tall figure with friendly serenity at the gentlefolk, obviouslyunderstanding nothing of their conversation and not caring to understandit.
"That’s so, no doubt," he said, with a significant shake of his head atSergey Ivanovitch’s words.
"Here, then, ask him. He knows nothing about it and thinks nothing,"said Levin. "Have you heard about the war, Mihalitch?" he said, turningto him. "What they read in the church? What do you think about it? Oughtwe to fight for the Christians?"
"What should we think? Alexander Nikolaevitch our Emperor has thoughtfor us; he thinks for us indeed in all things. It’s clearer for him tosee. Shall I bring a bit more bread? Give the little lad some more?" hesaid addressing Darya Alexandrovna and pointing to Grisha, who hadfinished his crust.
"I don’t need to ask," said Sergey Ivanovitch, "we have seen and areseeing hundreds and hundreds of people who give up everything to serve ajust cause, come from every part of Russia, and directly and clearlyexpress their thought and aim. They bring their halfpence or gothemselves and say directly what for. What does it mean?"
"It means, to my thinking," said Levin, who was beginning to get warm,"that among eighty millions of people there can always be found nothundreds, as now, but tens of thousands of people who have lost caste,ne’er-do-wells, who are always ready to go anywhere—to Pogatchev’sbands, to Khiva, to Serbia..."
"I tell you that it’s not a case of hundreds or of ne’er-do-wells, butthe best representatives of the people!" said Sergey Ivanovitch, with asmuch irritation as if he were defending the last penny of his fortune."And what of the subscriptions? In this case it is a whole peopledirectly expressing their will."
"That word ‘people’ is so vague," said Levin. "Parish clerks, teachers,and one in a thousand of the peasants, maybe, know what it’s all about.The rest of the eighty millions, like Mihalitch, far from expressingtheir will, haven’t the faintest idea what there is for them to expresstheir will about. What right have we to say that this is the people’swill?"


Chapter 16

Sergey Ivanovitch, being practiced in argument, did not reply, but atonce turned the conversation to another aspect of the subject.
"Oh, if you want to learn the spirit of the people by arithmeticalcomputation, of course it’s very difficult to arrive at it. And votinghas not been introduced among us and cannot be introduced, for it doesnot express the will of the people; but there are other ways of reachingthat. It is felt in the air, it is felt by the heart. I won’t speak ofthose deep currents which are astir in the still ocean of the people,and which are evident to every unprejudiced man; let us look at societyin the narrow sense. All the most diverse sections of the educatedpublic, hostile before, are merged in one. Every division is at an end,all the public organs say the same thing over and over again, all feelthe mighty torrent that has overtaken them and is carrying them in onedirection."
"Yes, all the newspapers do say the same thing," said the prince."That’s true. But so it is the same thing that all the frogs croakbefore a storm. One can hear nothing for them."
"Frogs or no frogs, I’m not the editor of a paper and I don’t want todefend them; but I am speaking of the unanimity in the intellectualworld," said Sergey Ivanovitch, addressing his brother. Levin would haveanswered, but the old prince interrupted him.
"Well, about that unanimity, that’s another thing, one may say," saidthe prince. "There’s my son-in-law, Stepan Arkadyevitch, you know him.He’s got a place now on the committee of a commission and something orother, I don’t remember. Only there’s nothing to do in it—why, Dolly,it’s no secret!—and a salary of eight thousand. You try asking himwhether his post is of use, he’ll prove to you that it’s most necessary.And he’s a truthful man too, but there’s no refusing to believe in theutility of eight thousand roubles."
"Yes, he asked me to give a message to Darya Alexandrovna about thepost," said Sergey Ivanovitch reluctantly, feeling the prince’s remarkto be ill-timed.
"So it is with the unanimity of the press. That’s been explained to me:as soon as there’s war their incomes are doubled. How can they helpbelieving in the destinies of the people and the Slavonic races ... andall that?"
"I don’t care for many of the papers, but that’s unjust," said SergeyIvanovitch.
"I would only make one condition," pursued the old prince. "AlphonseKarr said a capital thing before the war with Prussia: ‘You consider warto be inevitable? Very good. Let everyone who advocates war be enrolledin a special regiment of advance-guards, for the front of every storm,of every attack, to lead them all!’"
"A nice lot the editors would make!" said Katavasov, with a loud roar,as he pictured the editors he knew in this picked legion.
"But they’d run," said Dolly, "they’d only be in the way."
"Oh, if they ran away, then we’d have grape-shot or Cossacks with whipsbehind them," said the prince.
"But that’s a joke, and a poor one too, if you’ll excuse my saying so,prince," said Sergey Ivanovitch.
"I don’t see that it was a joke, that..." Levin was beginning, butSergey Ivanovitch interrupted him.
"Every member of society is called upon to do his own special work,"said he. "And men of thought are doing their work when they expresspublic opinion. And the single-hearted and full expression of publicopinion is the service of the press and a phenomenon to rejoice us atthe same time. Twenty years ago we should have been silent, but now wehave heard the voice of the Russian people, which is ready to rise asone man and ready to sacrifice itself for its oppressed brethren; thatis a great step and a proof of strength."
"But it’s not only making a sacrifice, but killing Turks," said Levintimidly. "The people make sacrifices and are ready to make sacrificesfor their soul, but not for murder," he added, instinctively connectingthe conversation with the ideas that had been absorbing his mind.
"For their soul? That’s a most puzzling expression for a natural scienceman, do you understand? What sort of thing is the soul?" said Katavasov,smiling.
"Oh, you know!"
"No, by God, I haven’t the faintest idea!" said Katavasov with a loudroar of laughter.
"‘I bring not peace, but a sword,’ says Christ," Sergey Ivanovitchrejoined for his part, quoting as simply as though it were the easiestthing to understand the very passage that had always puzzled Levin most.
"That’s so, no doubt," the old man repeated again. He was standing nearthem and responded to a chance glance turned in his direction.
"Ah, my dear fellow, you’re defeated, utterly defeated!" cried Katavasovgood-humoredly.
Levin reddened with vexation, not at being defeated, but at havingfailed to control himself and being drawn into argument.
"No, I can’t argue with them," he thought; "they wear impenetrablearmor, while I’m naked."
He saw that it was impossible to convince his brother and Katavasov, andhe saw even less possibility of himself agreeing with them. What theyadvocated was the very pride of intellect that had almost been his ruin.He could not admit that some dozens of men, among them his brother, hadthe right, on the ground of what they were told by some hundreds of glibvolunteers swarming to the capital, to say that they and the newspaperswere expressing the will and feeling of the people, and a feeling whichwas expressed in vengeance and murder. He could not admit this, becausehe neither saw the expression of such feelings in the people among whomhe was living, nor found them in himself (and he could not but considerhimself one of the persons making up the Russian people), and most ofall because he, like the people, did not know and could not know what isfor the general good, though he knew beyond a doubt that this generalgood could be attained only by the strict observance of that law ofright and wrong which has been revealed to every man, and therefore hecould not wish for war or advocate war for any general objects whatever.He said as Mihalitch did and the people, who had expressed their feelingin the traditional invitations of the Varyagi: "Be princes and rule overus. Gladly we promise complete submission. All the labor, allhumiliations, all sacrifices we take upon ourselves; but we will notjudge and decide." And now, according to Sergey Ivanovitch’s account,the people had foregone this privilege they had bought at such a costlyprice.
He wanted to say too that if public opinion were an infallible guide,then why were not revolutions and the commune as lawful as the movementin favor of the Slavonic peoples? But these were merely thoughts thatcould settle nothing. One thing could be seen beyond doubt—that was thatat the actual moment the discussion was irritating Sergey Ivanovitch,and so it was wrong to continue it. And Levin ceased speaking and thencalled the attention of his guests to the fact that the storm cloudswere gathering, and that they had better be going home before it rained.


Chapter 17

The old prince and Sergey Ivanovitch got into the trap and drove off;the rest of the party hastened homewards on foot.
But the storm-clouds, turning white and then black, moved down soquickly that they had to quicken their pace to get home before the rain.The foremost clouds, lowering and black as soot-laden smoke, rushed withextraordinary swiftness over the sky. They were still two hundred pacesfrom home and a gust of wind had already blown up, and every second thedownpour might be looked for.
The children ran ahead with frightened and gleeful shrieks. DaryaAlexandrovna, struggling painfully with her skirts that clung round herlegs, was not walking, but running, her eyes fixed on the children. Themen of the party, holding their hats on, strode with long steps besideher. They were just at the steps when a big drop fell splashing on theedge of the iron guttering. The children and their elders after them raninto the shelter of the house, talking merrily.
"Katerina Alexandrovna?" Levin asked of Agafea Mihalovna, who met themwith kerchiefs and rugs in the hall.
"We thought she was with you," she said.
"And Mitya?"
"In the copse, he must be, and the nurse with him."
Levin snatched up the rugs and ran towards the copse.
In that brief interval of time the storm clouds had moved on, coveringthe sun so completely that it was dark as an eclipse. Stubbornly, asthough insisting on its rights, the wind stopped Levin, and tearing theleaves and flowers off the lime trees and stripping the white birchbranches into strange unseemly nakedness, it twisted everything on oneside—acacias, flowers, burdocks, long grass, and tall tree-tops. Thepeasant girls working in the garden ran shrieking into shelter in theservants’ quarters. The streaming rain had already flung its white veilover all the distant forest and half the fields close by, and wasrapidly swooping down upon the copse. The wet of the rain spurting up intiny drops could be smelt in the air.
Holding his head bent down before him, and struggling with the wind thatstrove to tear the wraps away from him, Levin was moving up to the copseand had just caught sight of something white behind the oak tree, whenthere was a sudden flash, the whole earth seemed on fire, and the vaultof heaven seemed crashing overhead. Opening his blinded eyes, Levingazed through the thick veil of rain that separated him now from thecopse, and to his horror the first thing he saw was the green crest ofthe familiar oak-tree in the middle of the copse uncannily changing itsposition. "Can it have been struck?" Levin hardly had time to thinkwhen, moving more and more rapidly, the oak tree vanished behind theother trees, and he heard the crash of the great tree falling upon theothers.
The flash of lightning, the crash of thunder, and the instantaneouschill that ran through him were all merged for Levin in one sense ofterror.
"My God! my God! not on them!" he said.
And though he thought at once how senseless was his prayer that theyshould not have been killed by the oak which had fallen now, he repeatedit, knowing that he could do nothing better than utter this senselessprayer.
Running up to the place where they usually went, he did not find themthere.
They were at the other end of the copse under an old lime-tree; theywere calling him. Two figures in dark dresses (they had been lightsummer dresses when they started out) were standing bending oversomething. It was Kitty with the nurse. The rain was already ceasing,and it was beginning to get light when Levin reached them. The nurse wasnot wet on the lower part of her dress, but Kitty was drenched through,and her soaked clothes clung to her. Though the rain was over, theystill stood in the same position in which they had been standing whenthe storm broke. Both stood bending over a perambulator with a greenumbrella.
"Alive? Unhurt? Thank God!" he said, splashing with his soaked bootsthrough the standing water and running up to them.
Kitty’s rosy wet face was turned towards him, and she smiled timidlyunder her shapeless sopped hat.
"Aren’t you ashamed of yourself? I can’t think how you can be soreckless!" he said angrily to his wife.
"It wasn’t my fault, really. We were just meaning to go, when he madesuch a to-do that we had to change him. We were just..." Kitty begandefending herself.
Mitya was unharmed, dry, and still fast asleep.
"Well, thank God! I don’t know what I’m saying!"
They gathered up the baby’s wet belongings; the nurse picked up the babyand carried it. Levin walked beside his wife, and, penitent for havingbeen angry, he squeezed her hand when the nurse was not looking.


Chapter 18

During the whole of that day, in the extremely different conversationsin which he took part, only as it were with the top layer of his mind,in spite of the disappointment of not finding the change he expected inhimself, Levin had been all the while joyfully conscious of the fulnessof his heart.
After the rain it was too wet to go for a walk; besides, the stormclouds still hung about the horizon, and gathered here and there, blackand thundery, on the rim of the sky. The whole party spent the rest ofthe day in the house.
No more discussions sprang up; on the contrary, after dinner every onewas in the most amiable frame of mind.
At first Katavasov amused the ladies by his original jokes, which alwayspleased people on their first acquaintance with him. Then SergeyIvanovitch induced him to tell them about the very interestingobservations he had made on the habits and characteristics of commonhouseflies, and their life. Sergey Ivanovitch, too, was in good spirits,and at tea his brother drew him on to explain his views of the future ofthe Eastern question, and he spoke so simply and so well, that everyonelistened eagerly.
Kitty was the only one who did not hear it all—she was summoned to giveMitya his bath.
A few minutes after Kitty had left the room she sent for Levin to cometo the nursery.
Leaving his tea, and regretfully interrupting the interestingconversation, and at the same time uneasily wondering why he had beensent for, as this only happened on important occasions, Levin went tothe nursery.
Although he had been much interested by Sergey Ivanovitch’s views of thenew epoch in history that would be created by the emancipation of fortymillions of men of Slavonic race acting with Russia, a conception quitenew to him, and although he was disturbed by uneasy wonder at being sentfor by Kitty, as soon as he came out of the drawing room and was alone,his mind reverted at once to the thoughts of the morning. And all thetheories of the significance of the Slav element in the history of theworld seemed to him so trivial compared with what was passing in his ownsoul, that he instantly forgot it all and dropped back into the sameframe of mind that he had been in that morning.
He did not, as he had done at other times, recall the whole train ofthought—that he did not need. He fell back at once into the feelingwhich had guided him, which was connected with those thoughts, and hefound that feeling in his soul even stronger and more definite thanbefore. He did not, as he had had to do with previous attempts to findcomforting arguments, need to revive a whole chain of thought to findthe feeling. Now, on the contrary, the feeling of joy and peace waskeener than ever, and thought could not keep pace with feeling.
He walked across the terrace and looked at two stars that had come outin the darkening sky, and suddenly he remembered. "Yes, looking at thesky, I thought that the dome that I see is not a deception, and then Ithought something, I shirked facing something," he mused. "But whateverit was, there can be no disproving it! I have but to think, and all willcome clear!"
Just as he was going into the nursery he remembered what it was he hadshirked facing. It was that if the chief proof of the Divinity was Hisrevelation of what is right, how is it this revelation is confined tothe Christian church alone? What relation to this revelation have thebeliefs of the Buddhists, Mohammedans, who preached and did good too?
It seemed to him that he had an answer to this question; but he had nottime to formulate it to himself before he went into the nursery.
Kitty was standing with her sleeves tucked up over the baby in the bath.Hearing her husband’s footstep, she turned towards him, summoning him toher with her smile. With one hand she was supporting the fat baby thatlay floating and sprawling on its back, while with the other shesqueezed the sponge over him.
"Come, look, look!" she said, when her husband came up to her. "AgafeaMihalovna’s right. He knows us!"
Mitya had on that day given unmistakable, incontestable signs ofrecognizing all his friends.
As soon as Levin approached the bath, the experiment was tried, and itwas completely successful. The cook, sent for with this object, bentover the baby. He frowned and shook his head disapprovingly. Kitty bentdown to him, he gave her a beaming smile, propped his little hands onthe sponge and chirruped, making such a queer little contented soundwith his lips, that Kitty and the nurse were not alone in theiradmiration. Levin, too, was surprised and delighted.
The baby was taken out of the bath, drenched with water, wrapped intowels, dried, and after a piercing scream, handed to his mother.
"Well, I am glad you are beginning to love him," said Kitty to herhusband, when she had settled herself comfortably in her usual place,with the baby at her breast. "I am so glad! It had begun to distress me.You said you had no feeling for him."
"No; did I say that? I only said I was disappointed."
"What! disappointed in him?"
"Not disappointed in him, but in my own feeling; I had expected more. Ihad expected a rush of new delightful emotion to come as a surprise. Andthen instead of that—disgust, pity..."
She listened attentively, looking at him over the baby, while she putback on her slender fingers the rings she had taken off while givingMitya his bath.
"And most of all, at there being far more apprehension and pity thanpleasure. Today, after that fright during the storm, I understand how Ilove him."
Kitty’s smile was radiant.
"Were you very much frightened?" she said. "So was I too, but I feel itmore now that it’s over. I’m going to look at the oak. How niceKatavasov is! And what a happy day we’ve had altogether. And you’re sonice with Sergey Ivanovitch, when you care to be.... Well, go back tothem. It’s always so hot and steamy here after the bath."


Chapter 19

Going out of the nursery and being again alone, Levin went back at onceto the thought, in which there was something not clear.
Instead of going into the drawing room, where he heard voices, hestopped on the terrace, and leaning his elbows on the parapet, he gazedup at the sky.
It was quite dark now, and in the south, where he was looking, therewere no clouds. The storm had drifted on to the opposite side of thesky, and there were flashes of lightning and distant thunder from thatquarter. Levin listened to the monotonous drip from the lime trees inthe garden, and looked at the triangle of stars he knew so well, and theMilky Way with its branches that ran through its midst. At each flash oflightning the Milky Way, and even the bright stars, vanished, but assoon as the lightning died away, they reappeared in their places asthough some hand had flung them back with careful aim.
"Well, what is it perplexes me?" Levin said to himself, feelingbeforehand that the solution of his difficulties was ready in his soul,though he did not know it yet. "Yes, the one unmistakable, incontestablemanifestation of the Divinity is the law of right and wrong, which hascome into the world by revelation, and which I feel in myself, and inthe recognition of which—I don’t make myself, but whether I will ornot—I am made one with other men in one body of believers, which iscalled the church. Well, but the Jews, the Mohammedans, the Confucians,the Buddhists—what of them?" he put to himself the question he hadfeared to face. "Can these hundreds of millions of men be deprived ofthat highest blessing without which life has no meaning?" He pondered amoment, but immediately corrected himself. "But what am I questioning?"he said to himself. "I am questioning the relation to Divinity of allthe different religions of all mankind. I am questioning the universalmanifestation of God to all the world with all those misty blurs. Whatam I about? To me individually, to my heart has been revealed aknowledge beyond all doubt, and unattainable by reason, and here I amobstinately trying to express that knowledge in reason and words.
"Don’t I know that the stars don’t move?" he asked himself, gazing atthe bright planet which had shifted its position up to the topmost twigof the birch-tree. "But looking at the movements of the stars, I can’tpicture to myself the rotation of the earth, and I’m right in sayingthat the stars move.
"And could the astronomers have understood and calculated anything, ifthey had taken into account all the complicated and varied motions ofthe earth? All the marvelous conclusions they have reached about thedistances, weights, movements, and deflections of the heavenly bodiesare only founded on the apparent motions of the heavenly bodies about astationary earth, on that very motion I see before me now, which hasbeen so for millions of men during long ages, and was and will be alwaysalike, and can always be trusted. And just as the conclusions of theastronomers would have been vain and uncertain if not founded onobservations of the seen heavens, in relation to a single meridian and asingle horizon, so would my conclusions be vain and uncertain if notfounded on that conception of right, which has been and will be alwaysalike for all men, which has been revealed to me as a Christian, andwhich can always be trusted in my soul. The question of other religionsand their relations to Divinity I have no right to decide, and nopossibility of deciding."
"Oh, you haven’t gone in then?" he heard Kitty’s voice all at once, asshe came by the same way to the drawing-room.
"What is it? you’re not worried about anything?" she said, lookingintently at his face in the starlight.
But she could not have seen his face if a flash of lightning had nothidden the stars and revealed it. In that flash she saw his facedistinctly, and seeing him calm and happy, she smiled at him.
"She understands," he thought; "she knows what I’m thinking about. ShallI tell her or not? Yes, I’ll tell her." But at the moment he was aboutto speak, she began speaking.
"Kostya! do something for me," she said; "go into the corner room andsee if they’ve made it all right for Sergey Ivanovitch. I can’t verywell. See if they’ve put the new wash stand in it."
"Very well, I’ll go directly," said Levin, standing up and kissing her.
"No, I’d better not speak of it," he thought, when she had gone inbefore him. "It is a secret for me alone, of vital importance for me,and not to be put into words.
"This new feeling has not changed me, has not made me happy andenlightened all of a sudden, as I had dreamed, just like the feeling formy child. There was no surprise in this either. Faith—or not faith—Idon’t know what it is—but this feeling has come just as imperceptiblythrough suffering, and has taken firm root in my soul.
"I shall go on in the same way, losing my temper with Ivan the coachman,falling into angry discussions, expressing my opinions tactlessly; therewill be still the same wall between the holy of holies of my soul andother people, even my wife; I shall still go on scolding her for my ownterror, and being remorseful for it; I shall still be as unable tounderstand with my reason why I pray, and I shall still go on praying;but my life now, my whole life apart from anything that can happen tome, every minute of it is no more meaningless, as it was before, but ithas the positive meaning of goodness, which I have the power to put intoit."