PART I



Book I. The History Of A Family


Chapter I. Fyodor Pavlovitch Karamazov

Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov was the third son of Fyodor PavlovitchKaramazov, a land owner well known in our district in his own day, andstill remembered among us owing to his gloomy and tragic death, whichhappened thirteen years ago, and which I shall describe in its properplace. For the present I will only say that this “landowner”—for so weused to call him, although he hardly spent a day of his life on his ownestate—was a strange type, yet one pretty frequently to be met with, atype abject and vicious and at the same time senseless. But he was one ofthose senseless persons who are very well capable of looking after theirworldly affairs, and, apparently, after nothing else. Fyodor Pavlovitch,for instance, began with next to nothing; his estate was of the smallest;he ran to dine at other men’s tables, and fastened on them as a toady, yetat his death it appeared that he had a hundred thousand roubles in hardcash. At the same time, he was all his life one of the most senseless,fantastical fellows in the whole district. I repeat, it was notstupidity—the majority of these fantastical fellows are shrewd andintelligent enough—but just senselessness, and a peculiar national form ofit.
He was married twice, and had three sons, the eldest, Dmitri, by his firstwife, and two, Ivan and Alexey, by his second. Fyodor Pavlovitch’s firstwife, Adelaïda Ivanovna, belonged to a fairly rich and distinguished noblefamily, also landowners in our district, the Miüsovs. How it came to passthat an heiress, who was also a beauty, and moreover one of thosevigorous, intelligent girls, so common in this generation, but sometimesalso to be found in the last, could have married such a worthless, punyweakling, as we all called him, I won’t attempt to explain. I knew a younglady of the last “romantic” generation who after some years of anenigmatic passion for a gentleman, whom she might quite easily havemarried at any moment, invented insuperable obstacles to their union, andended by throwing herself one stormy night into a rather deep and rapidriver from a high bank, almost a precipice, and so perished, entirely tosatisfy her own caprice, and to be like Shakespeare’s Ophelia. Indeed, ifthis precipice, a chosen and favorite spot of hers, had been lesspicturesque, if there had been a prosaic flat bank in its place, mostlikely the suicide would never have taken place. This is a fact, andprobably there have been not a few similar instances in the last two orthree generations. Adelaïda Ivanovna Miüsov’s action was similarly, nodoubt, an echo of other people’s ideas, and was due to the irritationcaused by lack of mental freedom. She wanted, perhaps, to show herfeminine independence, to override class distinctions and the despotism ofher family. And a pliable imagination persuaded her, we must suppose, fora brief moment, that Fyodor Pavlovitch, in spite of his parasiticposition, was one of the bold and ironical spirits of that progressiveepoch, though he was, in fact, an ill‐natured buffoon and nothing more.What gave the marriage piquancy was that it was preceded by an elopement,and this greatly captivated Adelaïda Ivanovna’s fancy. Fyodor Pavlovitch’sposition at the time made him specially eager for any such enterprise, forhe was passionately anxious to make a career in one way or another. Toattach himself to a good family and obtain a dowry was an alluringprospect. As for mutual love it did not exist apparently, either in thebride or in him, in spite of Adelaïda Ivanovna’s beauty. This was,perhaps, a unique case of the kind in the life of Fyodor Pavlovitch, whowas always of a voluptuous temper, and ready to run after any petticoat onthe slightest encouragement. She seems to have been the only woman whomade no particular appeal to his senses.
Immediately after the elopement Adelaïda Ivanovna discerned in a flashthat she had no feeling for her husband but contempt. The marriageaccordingly showed itself in its true colors with extraordinary rapidity.Although the family accepted the event pretty quickly and apportioned therunaway bride her dowry, the husband and wife began to lead a mostdisorderly life, and there were everlasting scenes between them. It wassaid that the young wife showed incomparably more generosity and dignitythan Fyodor Pavlovitch, who, as is now known, got hold of all her money upto twenty‐five thousand roubles as soon as she received it, so that thosethousands were lost to her for ever. The little village and the ratherfine town house which formed part of her dowry he did his utmost for along time to transfer to his name, by means of some deed of conveyance. Hewould probably have succeeded, merely from her moral fatigue and desire toget rid of him, and from the contempt and loathing he aroused by hispersistent and shameless importunity. But, fortunately, AdelaïdaIvanovna’s family intervened and circumvented his greediness. It is knownfor a fact that frequent fights took place between the husband and wife,but rumor had it that Fyodor Pavlovitch did not beat his wife but wasbeaten by her, for she was a hot‐tempered, bold, dark‐browed, impatientwoman, possessed of remarkable physical strength. Finally, she left thehouse and ran away from Fyodor Pavlovitch with a destitute divinitystudent, leaving Mitya, a child of three years old, in her husband’shands. Immediately Fyodor Pavlovitch introduced a regular harem into thehouse, and abandoned himself to orgies of drunkenness. In the intervals heused to drive all over the province, complaining tearfully to each and allof Adelaïda Ivanovna’s having left him, going into details too disgracefulfor a husband to mention in regard to his own married life. What seemed togratify him and flatter his self‐love most was to play the ridiculous partof the injured husband, and to parade his woes with embellishments.
“One would think that you’d got a promotion, Fyodor Pavlovitch, you seemso pleased in spite of your sorrow,” scoffers said to him. Many even addedthat he was glad of a new comic part in which to play the buffoon, andthat it was simply to make it funnier that he pretended to be unaware ofhis ludicrous position. But, who knows, it may have been simplicity. Atlast he succeeded in getting on the track of his runaway wife. The poorwoman turned out to be in Petersburg, where she had gone with her divinitystudent, and where she had thrown herself into a life of completeemancipation. Fyodor Pavlovitch at once began bustling about, makingpreparations to go to Petersburg, with what object he could not himselfhave said. He would perhaps have really gone; but having determined to doso he felt at once entitled to fortify himself for the journey by anotherbout of reckless drinking. And just at that time his wife’s familyreceived the news of her death in Petersburg. She had died quite suddenlyin a garret, according to one story, of typhus, or as another version hadit, of starvation. Fyodor Pavlovitch was drunk when he heard of his wife’sdeath, and the story is that he ran out into the street and began shoutingwith joy, raising his hands to Heaven: “Lord, now lettest Thou Thy servantdepart in peace,” but others say he wept without restraint like a littlechild, so much so that people were sorry for him, in spite of therepulsion he inspired. It is quite possible that both versions were true,that he rejoiced at his release, and at the same time wept for her whoreleased him. As a general rule, people, even the wicked, are much morenaïve and simple‐hearted than we suppose. And we ourselves are, too.


Chapter II. He Gets Rid Of His Eldest Son

You can easily imagine what a father such a man could be and how he wouldbring up his children. His behavior as a father was exactly what might beexpected. He completely abandoned the child of his marriage with AdelaïdaIvanovna, not from malice, nor because of his matrimonial grievances, butsimply because he forgot him. While he was wearying every one with histears and complaints, and turning his house into a sink of debauchery, afaithful servant of the family, Grigory, took the three‐year‐old Mityainto his care. If he hadn’t looked after him there would have been no oneeven to change the baby’s little shirt.
It happened moreover that the child’s relations on his mother’s sideforgot him too at first. His grandfather was no longer living, his widow,Mitya’s grandmother, had moved to Moscow, and was seriously ill, while hisdaughters were married, so that Mitya remained for almost a whole year inold Grigory’s charge and lived with him in the servant’s cottage. But ifhis father had remembered him (he could not, indeed, have been altogetherunaware of his existence) he would have sent him back to the cottage, asthe child would only have been in the way of his debaucheries. But acousin of Mitya’s mother, Pyotr Alexandrovitch Miüsov, happened to returnfrom Paris. He lived for many years afterwards abroad, but was at thattime quite a young man, and distinguished among the Miüsovs as a man ofenlightened ideas and of European culture, who had been in the capitalsand abroad. Towards the end of his life he became a Liberal of the typecommon in the forties and fifties. In the course of his career he had comeinto contact with many of the most Liberal men of his epoch, both inRussia and abroad. He had known Proudhon and Bakunin personally, and inhis declining years was very fond of describing the three days of theParis Revolution of February 1848, hinting that he himself had almosttaken part in the fighting on the barricades. This was one of the mostgrateful recollections of his youth. He had an independent property ofabout a thousand souls, to reckon in the old style. His splendid estatelay on the outskirts of our little town and bordered on the lands of ourfamous monastery, with which Pyotr Alexandrovitch began an endlesslawsuit, almost as soon as he came into the estate, concerning the rightsof fishing in the river or wood‐cutting in the forest, I don’t knowexactly which. He regarded it as his duty as a citizen and a man ofculture to open an attack upon the “clericals.” Hearing all about AdelaïdaIvanovna, whom he, of course, remembered, and in whom he had at one timebeen interested, and learning of the existence of Mitya, he intervened, inspite of all his youthful indignation and contempt for Fyodor Pavlovitch.He made the latter’s acquaintance for the first time, and told himdirectly that he wished to undertake the child’s education. He used longafterwards to tell as a characteristic touch, that when he began to speakof Mitya, Fyodor Pavlovitch looked for some time as though he did notunderstand what child he was talking about, and even as though he wassurprised to hear that he had a little son in the house. The story mayhave been exaggerated, yet it must have been something like the truth.
Fyodor Pavlovitch was all his life fond of acting, of suddenly playing anunexpected part, sometimes without any motive for doing so, and even tohis own direct disadvantage, as, for instance, in the present case. Thishabit, however, is characteristic of a very great number of people, someof them very clever ones, not like Fyodor Pavlovitch. Pyotr Alexandrovitchcarried the business through vigorously, and was appointed, with FyodorPavlovitch, joint guardian of the child, who had a small property, a houseand land, left him by his mother. Mitya did, in fact, pass into thiscousin’s keeping, but as the latter had no family of his own, and aftersecuring the revenues of his estates was in haste to return at once toParis, he left the boy in charge of one of his cousins, a lady living inMoscow. It came to pass that, settling permanently in Paris he, too,forgot the child, especially when the Revolution of February broke out,making an impression on his mind that he remembered all the rest of hislife. The Moscow lady died, and Mitya passed into the care of one of hermarried daughters. I believe he changed his home a fourth time later on. Iwon’t enlarge upon that now, as I shall have much to tell later of FyodorPavlovitch’s firstborn, and must confine myself now to the most essentialfacts about him, without which I could not begin my story.
In the first place, this Mitya, or rather Dmitri Fyodorovitch, was theonly one of Fyodor Pavlovitch’s three sons who grew up in the belief thathe had property, and that he would be independent on coming of age. Hespent an irregular boyhood and youth. He did not finish his studies at thegymnasium, he got into a military school, then went to the Caucasus, waspromoted, fought a duel, and was degraded to the ranks, earned promotionagain, led a wild life, and spent a good deal of money. He did not beginto receive any income from Fyodor Pavlovitch until he came of age, anduntil then got into debt. He saw and knew his father, Fyodor Pavlovitch,for the first time on coming of age, when he visited our neighborhood onpurpose to settle with him about his property. He seems not to have likedhis father. He did not stay long with him, and made haste to get away,having only succeeded in obtaining a sum of money, and entering into anagreement for future payments from the estate, of the revenues and valueof which he was unable (a fact worthy of note), upon this occasion, to geta statement from his father. Fyodor Pavlovitch remarked for the first timethen (this, too, should be noted) that Mitya had a vague and exaggeratedidea of his property. Fyodor Pavlovitch was very well satisfied with this,as it fell in with his own designs. He gathered only that the young manwas frivolous, unruly, of violent passions, impatient, and dissipated, andthat if he could only obtain ready money he would be satisfied, althoughonly, of course, for a short time. So Fyodor Pavlovitch began to takeadvantage of this fact, sending him from time to time small doles,installments. In the end, when four years later, Mitya, losing patience,came a second time to our little town to settle up once for all with hisfather, it turned out to his amazement that he had nothing, that it wasdifficult to get an account even, that he had received the whole value ofhis property in sums of money from Fyodor Pavlovitch, and was perhaps evenin debt to him, that by various agreements into which he had, of his owndesire, entered at various previous dates, he had no right to expectanything more, and so on, and so on. The young man was overwhelmed,suspected deceit and cheating, and was almost beside himself. And, indeed,this circumstance led to the catastrophe, the account of which forms thesubject of my first introductory story, or rather the external side of it.But before I pass to that story I must say a little of Fyodor Pavlovitch’sother two sons, and of their origin.


Chapter III. The Second Marriage And The Second Family

Very shortly after getting his four‐year‐old Mitya off his hands FyodorPavlovitch married a second time. His second marriage lasted eight years.He took this second wife, Sofya Ivanovna, also a very young girl, fromanother province, where he had gone upon some small piece of business incompany with a Jew. Though Fyodor Pavlovitch was a drunkard and a viciousdebauchee he never neglected investing his capital, and managed hisbusiness affairs very successfully, though, no doubt, not over‐scrupulously. Sofya Ivanovna was the daughter of an obscure deacon, andwas left from childhood an orphan without relations. She grew up in thehouse of a general’s widow, a wealthy old lady of good position, who wasat once her benefactress and tormentor. I do not know the details, but Ihave only heard that the orphan girl, a meek and gentle creature, was oncecut down from a halter in which she was hanging from a nail in the loft,so terrible were her sufferings from the caprice and everlasting naggingof this old woman, who was apparently not bad‐hearted but had become aninsufferable tyrant through idleness.
Fyodor Pavlovitch made her an offer; inquiries were made about him and hewas refused. But again, as in his first marriage, he proposed an elopementto the orphan girl. There is very little doubt that she would not on anyaccount have married him if she had known a little more about him in time.But she lived in another province; besides, what could a little girl ofsixteen know about it, except that she would be better at the bottom ofthe river than remaining with her benefactress. So the poor childexchanged a benefactress for a benefactor. Fyodor Pavlovitch did not get apenny this time, for the general’s widow was furious. She gave themnothing and cursed them both. But he had not reckoned on a dowry; whatallured him was the remarkable beauty of the innocent girl, above all herinnocent appearance, which had a peculiar attraction for a viciousprofligate, who had hitherto admired only the coarser types of femininebeauty.
“Those innocent eyes slit my soul up like a razor,” he used to sayafterwards, with his loathsome snigger. In a man so depraved this might,of course, mean no more than sensual attraction. As he had received nodowry with his wife, and had, so to speak, taken her “from the halter,” hedid not stand on ceremony with her. Making her feel that she had “wronged”him, he took advantage of her phenomenal meekness and submissiveness totrample on the elementary decencies of marriage. He gathered loose womeninto his house, and carried on orgies of debauchery in his wife’spresence. To show what a pass things had come to, I may mention thatGrigory, the gloomy, stupid, obstinate, argumentative servant, who hadalways hated his first mistress, Adelaïda Ivanovna, took the side of hisnew mistress. He championed her cause, abusing Fyodor Pavlovitch in amanner little befitting a servant, and on one occasion broke up the revelsand drove all the disorderly women out of the house. In the end thisunhappy young woman, kept in terror from her childhood, fell into thatkind of nervous disease which is most frequently found in peasant womenwho are said to be “possessed by devils.” At times after terrible fits ofhysterics she even lost her reason. Yet she bore Fyodor Pavlovitch twosons, Ivan and Alexey, the eldest in the first year of marriage and thesecond three years later. When she died, little Alexey was in his fourthyear, and, strange as it seems, I know that he remembered his mother allhis life, like a dream, of course. At her death almost exactly the samething happened to the two little boys as to their elder brother, Mitya.They were completely forgotten and abandoned by their father. They werelooked after by the same Grigory and lived in his cottage, where they werefound by the tyrannical old lady who had brought up their mother. She wasstill alive, and had not, all those eight years, forgotten the insult doneher. All that time she was obtaining exact information as to her Sofya’smanner of life, and hearing of her illness and hideous surroundings shedeclared aloud two or three times to her retainers:
“It serves her right. God has punished her for her ingratitude.”
Exactly three months after Sofya Ivanovna’s death the general’s widowsuddenly appeared in our town, and went straight to Fyodor Pavlovitch’shouse. She spent only half an hour in the town but she did a great deal.It was evening. Fyodor Pavlovitch, whom she had not seen for those eightyears, came in to her drunk. The story is that instantly upon seeing him,without any sort of explanation, she gave him two good, resounding slapson the face, seized him by a tuft of hair, and shook him three times upand down. Then, without a word, she went straight to the cottage to thetwo boys. Seeing, at the first glance, that they were unwashed and indirty linen, she promptly gave Grigory, too, a box on the ear, andannouncing that she would carry off both the children she wrapped themjust as they were in a rug, put them in the carriage, and drove off to herown town. Grigory accepted the blow like a devoted slave, without a word,and when he escorted the old lady to her carriage he made her a low bowand pronounced impressively that, “God would repay her for the orphans.”“You are a blockhead all the same,” the old lady shouted to him as shedrove away.
Fyodor Pavlovitch, thinking it over, decided that it was a good thing, anddid not refuse the general’s widow his formal consent to any propositionin regard to his children’s education. As for the slaps she had given him,he drove all over the town telling the story.
It happened that the old lady died soon after this, but she left the boysin her will a thousand roubles each “for their instruction, and so thatall be spent on them exclusively, with the condition that it be soportioned out as to last till they are twenty‐one, for it is more thanadequate provision for such children. If other people think fit to throwaway their money, let them.” I have not read the will myself, but I heardthere was something queer of the sort, very whimsically expressed. Theprincipal heir, Yefim Petrovitch Polenov, the Marshal of Nobility of theprovince, turned out, however, to be an honest man. Writing to FyodorPavlovitch, and discerning at once that he could extract nothing from himfor his children’s education (though the latter never directly refused butonly procrastinated as he always did in such cases, and was, indeed, attimes effusively sentimental), Yefim Petrovitch took a personal interestin the orphans. He became especially fond of the younger, Alexey, wholived for a long while as one of his family. I beg the reader to note thisfrom the beginning. And to Yefim Petrovitch, a man of a generosity andhumanity rarely to be met with, the young people were more indebted fortheir education and bringing up than to any one. He kept the two thousandroubles left to them by the general’s widow intact, so that by the timethey came of age their portions had been doubled by the accumulation ofinterest. He educated them both at his own expense, and certainly spentfar more than a thousand roubles upon each of them. I won’t enter into adetailed account of their boyhood and youth, but will only mention a fewof the most important events. Of the elder, Ivan, I will only say that hegrew into a somewhat morose and reserved, though far from timid boy. Atten years old he had realized that they were living not in their own homebut on other people’s charity, and that their father was a man of whom itwas disgraceful to speak. This boy began very early, almost in his infancy(so they say at least), to show a brilliant and unusual aptitude forlearning. I don’t know precisely why, but he left the family of YefimPetrovitch when he was hardly thirteen, entering a Moscow gymnasium, andboarding with an experienced and celebrated teacher, an old friend ofYefim Petrovitch. Ivan used to declare afterwards that this was all due tothe “ardor for good works” of Yefim Petrovitch, who was captivated by theidea that the boy’s genius should be trained by a teacher of genius. Butneither Yefim Petrovitch nor this teacher was living when the young manfinished at the gymnasium and entered the university. As Yefim Petrovitchhad made no provision for the payment of the tyrannical old lady’s legacy,which had grown from one thousand to two, it was delayed, owing toformalities inevitable in Russia, and the young man was in great straitsfor the first two years at the university, as he was forced to keephimself all the time he was studying. It must be noted that he did noteven attempt to communicate with his father, perhaps from pride, fromcontempt for him, or perhaps from his cool common sense, which told himthat from such a father he would get no real assistance. However that mayhave been, the young man was by no means despondent and succeeded ingetting work, at first giving sixpenny lessons and afterwards gettingparagraphs on street incidents into the newspapers under the signature of“Eye‐Witness.” These paragraphs, it was said, were so interesting andpiquant that they were soon taken. This alone showed the young man’spractical and intellectual superiority over the masses of needy andunfortunate students of both sexes who hang about the offices of thenewspapers and journals, unable to think of anything better thaneverlasting entreaties for copying and translations from the French.Having once got into touch with the editors Ivan Fyodorovitch always keptup his connection with them, and in his latter years at the university hepublished brilliant reviews of books upon various special subjects, sothat he became well known in literary circles. But only in his last yearhe suddenly succeeded in attracting the attention of a far wider circle ofreaders, so that a great many people noticed and remembered him. It wasrather a curious incident. When he had just left the university and waspreparing to go abroad upon his two thousand roubles, Ivan Fyodorovitchpublished in one of the more important journals a strange article, whichattracted general notice, on a subject of which he might have beensupposed to know nothing, as he was a student of natural science. Thearticle dealt with a subject which was being debated everywhere at thetime—the position of the ecclesiastical courts. After discussing severalopinions on the subject he went on to explain his own view. What was moststriking about the article was its tone, and its unexpected conclusion.Many of the Church party regarded him unquestioningly as on their side.And yet not only the secularists but even atheists joined them in theirapplause. Finally some sagacious persons opined that the article wasnothing but an impudent satirical burlesque. I mention this incidentparticularly because this article penetrated into the famous monastery inour neighborhood, where the inmates, being particularly interested in thequestion of the ecclesiastical courts, were completely bewildered by it.Learning the author’s name, they were interested in his being a native ofthe town and the son of “that Fyodor Pavlovitch.” And just then it wasthat the author himself made his appearance among us.
Why Ivan Fyodorovitch had come amongst us I remember asking myself at thetime with a certain uneasiness. This fateful visit, which was the firststep leading to so many consequences, I never fully explained to myself.It seemed strange on the face of it that a young man so learned, so proud,and apparently so cautious, should suddenly visit such an infamous houseand a father who had ignored him all his life, hardly knew him, neverthought of him, and would not under any circumstances have given himmoney, though he was always afraid that his sons Ivan and Alexey wouldalso come to ask him for it. And here the young man was staying in thehouse of such a father, had been living with him for two months, and theywere on the best possible terms. This last fact was a special cause ofwonder to many others as well as to me. Pyotr Alexandrovitch Miüsov, ofwhom we have spoken already, the cousin of Fyodor Pavlovitch’s first wife,happened to be in the neighborhood again on a visit to his estate. He hadcome from Paris, which was his permanent home. I remember that he was moresurprised than any one when he made the acquaintance of the young man, whointerested him extremely, and with whom he sometimes argued and notwithout an inner pang compared himself in acquirements.
“He is proud,” he used to say, “he will never be in want of pence; he hasgot money enough to go abroad now. What does he want here? Every one cansee that he hasn’t come for money, for his father would never give himany. He has no taste for drink and dissipation, and yet his father can’tdo without him. They get on so well together!”
That was the truth; the young man had an unmistakable influence over hisfather, who positively appeared to be behaving more decently and evenseemed at times ready to obey his son, though often extremely and evenspitefully perverse.
It was only later that we learned that Ivan had come partly at the requestof, and in the interests of, his elder brother, Dmitri, whom he saw forthe first time on this very visit, though he had before leaving Moscowbeen in correspondence with him about an important matter of more concernto Dmitri than himself. What that business was the reader will learn fullyin due time. Yet even when I did know of this special circumstance I stillfelt Ivan Fyodorovitch to be an enigmatic figure, and thought his visitrather mysterious.
I may add that Ivan appeared at the time in the light of a mediatorbetween his father and his elder brother Dmitri, who was in open quarrelwith his father and even planning to bring an action against him.
The family, I repeat, was now united for the first time, and some of itsmembers met for the first time in their lives. The younger brother,Alexey, had been a year already among us, having been the first of thethree to arrive. It is of that brother Alexey I find it most difficult tospeak in this introduction. Yet I must give some preliminary account ofhim, if only to explain one queer fact, which is that I have to introducemy hero to the reader wearing the cassock of a novice. Yes, he had beenfor the last year in our monastery, and seemed willing to be cloisteredthere for the rest of his life.


Chapter IV. The Third Son, Alyosha

He was only twenty, his brother Ivan was in his twenty‐fourth year at thetime, while their elder brother Dmitri was twenty‐seven. First of all, Imust explain that this young man, Alyosha, was not a fanatic, and, in myopinion at least, was not even a mystic. I may as well give my fullopinion from the beginning. He was simply an early lover of humanity, andthat he adopted the monastic life was simply because at that time itstruck him, so to say, as the ideal escape for his soul struggling fromthe darkness of worldly wickedness to the light of love. And the reasonthis life struck him in this way was that he found in it at that time, ashe thought, an extraordinary being, our celebrated elder, Zossima, to whomhe became attached with all the warm first love of his ardent heart. But Ido not dispute that he was very strange even at that time, and had been soindeed from his cradle. I have mentioned already, by the way, that thoughhe lost his mother in his fourth year he remembered her all his life—herface, her caresses, “as though she stood living before me.” Such memoriesmay persist, as every one knows, from an even earlier age, even from twoyears old, but scarcely standing out through a whole lifetime like spotsof light out of darkness, like a corner torn out of a huge picture, whichhas all faded and disappeared except that fragment. That is how it waswith him. He remembered one still summer evening, an open window, theslanting rays of the setting sun (that he recalled most vividly of all);in a corner of the room the holy image, before it a lighted lamp, and onher knees before the image his mother, sobbing hysterically with cries andmoans, snatching him up in both arms, squeezing him close till it hurt,and praying for him to the Mother of God, holding him out in both arms tothe image as though to put him under the Mother’s protection ... andsuddenly a nurse runs in and snatches him from her in terror. That was thepicture! And Alyosha remembered his mother’s face at that minute. He usedto say that it was frenzied but beautiful as he remembered. But he rarelycared to speak of this memory to any one. In his childhood and youth hewas by no means expansive, and talked little indeed, but not from shynessor a sullen unsociability; quite the contrary, from something different,from a sort of inner preoccupation entirely personal and unconcerned withother people, but so important to him that he seemed, as it were, toforget others on account of it. But he was fond of people: he seemedthroughout his life to put implicit trust in people: yet no one everlooked on him as a simpleton or naïve person. There was something abouthim which made one feel at once (and it was so all his life afterwards)that he did not care to be a judge of others—that he would never take itupon himself to criticize and would never condemn any one for anything. Heseemed, indeed, to accept everything without the least condemnation thoughoften grieving bitterly: and this was so much so that no one couldsurprise or frighten him even in his earliest youth. Coming at twenty tohis father’s house, which was a very sink of filthy debauchery, he, chasteand pure as he was, simply withdrew in silence when to look on wasunbearable, but without the slightest sign of contempt or condemnation.His father, who had once been in a dependent position, and so wassensitive and ready to take offense, met him at first with distrust andsullenness. “He does not say much,” he used to say, “and thinks the more.”But soon, within a fortnight indeed, he took to embracing him and kissinghim terribly often, with drunken tears, with sottish sentimentality, yethe evidently felt a real and deep affection for him, such as he had neverbeen capable of feeling for any one before.
Every one, indeed, loved this young man wherever he went, and it was sofrom his earliest childhood. When he entered the household of his patronand benefactor, Yefim Petrovitch Polenov, he gained the hearts of all thefamily, so that they looked on him quite as their own child. Yet heentered the house at such a tender age that he could not have acted fromdesign nor artfulness in winning affection. So that the gift of makinghimself loved directly and unconsciously was inherent in him, in his verynature, so to speak. It was the same at school, though he seemed to bejust one of those children who are distrusted, sometimes ridiculed, andeven disliked by their schoolfellows. He was dreamy, for instance, andrather solitary. From his earliest childhood he was fond of creeping intoa corner to read, and yet he was a general favorite all the while he wasat school. He was rarely playful or merry, but any one could see at thefirst glance that this was not from any sullenness. On the contrary he wasbright and good‐tempered. He never tried to show off among hisschoolfellows. Perhaps because of this, he was never afraid of any one,yet the boys immediately understood that he was not proud of hisfearlessness and seemed to be unaware that he was bold and courageous. Henever resented an insult. It would happen that an hour after the offensehe would address the offender or answer some question with as trustful andcandid an expression as though nothing had happened between them. And itwas not that he seemed to have forgotten or intentionally forgiven theaffront, but simply that he did not regard it as an affront, and thiscompletely conquered and captivated the boys. He had one characteristicwhich made all his schoolfellows from the bottom class to the top want tomock at him, not from malice but because it amused them. Thischaracteristic was a wild fanatical modesty and chastity. He could notbear to hear certain words and certain conversations about women. Thereare “certain” words and conversations unhappily impossible to eradicate inschools. Boys pure in mind and heart, almost children, are fond of talkingin school among themselves, and even aloud, of things, pictures, andimages of which even soldiers would sometimes hesitate to speak. More thanthat, much that soldiers have no knowledge or conception of is familiar toquite young children of our intellectual and higher classes. There is nomoral depravity, no real corrupt inner cynicism in it, but there is theappearance of it, and it is often looked upon among them as somethingrefined, subtle, daring, and worthy of imitation. Seeing that AlyoshaKaramazov put his fingers in his ears when they talked of “that,” theyused sometimes to crowd round him, pull his hands away, and shoutnastiness into both ears, while he struggled, slipped to the floor, triedto hide himself without uttering one word of abuse, enduring their insultsin silence. But at last they left him alone and gave up taunting him withbeing a “regular girl,” and what’s more they looked upon it withcompassion as a weakness. He was always one of the best in the class butwas never first.
At the time of Yefim Petrovitch’s death Alyosha had two more years tocomplete at the provincial gymnasium. The inconsolable widow went almostimmediately after his death for a long visit to Italy with her wholefamily, which consisted only of women and girls. Alyosha went to live inthe house of two distant relations of Yefim Petrovitch, ladies whom he hadnever seen before. On what terms he lived with them he did not knowhimself. It was very characteristic of him, indeed, that he never cared atwhose expense he was living. In that respect he was a striking contrast tohis elder brother Ivan, who struggled with poverty for his first two yearsin the university, maintained himself by his own efforts, and had fromchildhood been bitterly conscious of living at the expense of hisbenefactor. But this strange trait in Alyosha’s character must not, Ithink, be criticized too severely, for at the slightest acquaintance withhim any one would have perceived that Alyosha was one of those youths,almost of the type of religious enthusiast, who, if they were suddenly tocome into possession of a large fortune, would not hesitate to give itaway for the asking, either for good works or perhaps to a clever rogue.In general he seemed scarcely to know the value of money, not, of course,in a literal sense. When he was given pocket‐money, which he never askedfor, he was either terribly careless of it so that it was gone in amoment, or he kept it for weeks together, not knowing what to do with it.
In later years Pyotr Alexandrovitch Miüsov, a man very sensitive on thescore of money and bourgeois honesty, pronounced the following judgment,after getting to know Alyosha:
“Here is perhaps the one man in the world whom you might leave alonewithout a penny, in the center of an unknown town of a millioninhabitants, and he would not come to harm, he would not die of cold andhunger, for he would be fed and sheltered at once; and if he were not, hewould find a shelter for himself, and it would cost him no effort orhumiliation. And to shelter him would be no burden, but, on the contrary,would probably be looked on as a pleasure.”
He did not finish his studies at the gymnasium. A year before the end ofthe course he suddenly announced to the ladies that he was going to seehis father about a plan which had occurred to him. They were sorry andunwilling to let him go. The journey was not an expensive one, and theladies would not let him pawn his watch, a parting present from hisbenefactor’s family. They provided him liberally with money and evenfitted him out with new clothes and linen. But he returned half the moneythey gave him, saying that he intended to go third class. On his arrivalin the town he made no answer to his father’s first inquiry why he hadcome before completing his studies, and seemed, so they say, unusuallythoughtful. It soon became apparent that he was looking for his mother’stomb. He practically acknowledged at the time that that was the onlyobject of his visit. But it can hardly have been the whole reason of it.It is more probable that he himself did not understand and could notexplain what had suddenly arisen in his soul, and drawn him irresistiblyinto a new, unknown, but inevitable path. Fyodor Pavlovitch could not showhim where his second wife was buried, for he had never visited her gravesince he had thrown earth upon her coffin, and in the course of years hadentirely forgotten where she was buried.
Fyodor Pavlovitch, by the way, had for some time previously not beenliving in our town. Three or four years after his wife’s death he had goneto the south of Russia and finally turned up in Odessa, where he spentseveral years. He made the acquaintance at first, in his own words, “of alot of low Jews, Jewesses, and Jewkins,” and ended by being received by“Jews high and low alike.” It may be presumed that at this period hedeveloped a peculiar faculty for making and hoarding money. He finallyreturned to our town only three years before Alyosha’s arrival. His formeracquaintances found him looking terribly aged, although he was by no meansan old man. He behaved not exactly with more dignity but with moreeffrontery. The former buffoon showed an insolent propensity for makingbuffoons of others. His depravity with women was not simply what it usedto be, but even more revolting. In a short time he opened a great numberof new taverns in the district. It was evident that he had perhaps ahundred thousand roubles or not much less. Many of the inhabitants of thetown and district were soon in his debt, and, of course, had given goodsecurity. Of late, too, he looked somehow bloated and seemed moreirresponsible, more uneven, had sunk into a sort of incoherence, used tobegin one thing and go on with another, as though he were letting himselfgo altogether. He was more and more frequently drunk. And, if it had notbeen for the same servant Grigory, who by that time had aged considerablytoo, and used to look after him sometimes almost like a tutor, FyodorPavlovitch might have got into terrible scrapes. Alyosha’s arrival seemedto affect even his moral side, as though something had awakened in thisprematurely old man which had long been dead in his soul.
“Do you know,” he used often to say, looking at Alyosha, “that you arelike her, ‘the crazy woman’ ”—that was what he used to call his dead wife,Alyosha’s mother. Grigory it was who pointed out the “crazy woman’s” graveto Alyosha. He took him to our town cemetery and showed him in a remotecorner a cast‐iron tombstone, cheap but decently kept, on which wereinscribed the name and age of the deceased and the date of her death, andbelow a four‐lined verse, such as are commonly used on old‐fashionedmiddle‐class tombs. To Alyosha’s amazement this tomb turned out to beGrigory’s doing. He had put it up on the poor “crazy woman’s” grave at hisown expense, after Fyodor Pavlovitch, whom he had often pestered about thegrave, had gone to Odessa, abandoning the grave and all his memories.Alyosha showed no particular emotion at the sight of his mother’s grave.He only listened to Grigory’s minute and solemn account of the erection ofthe tomb; he stood with bowed head and walked away without uttering aword. It was perhaps a year before he visited the cemetery again. But thislittle episode was not without an influence upon Fyodor Pavlovitch—and avery original one. He suddenly took a thousand roubles to our monastery topay for requiems for the soul of his wife; but not for the second,Alyosha’s mother, the “crazy woman,” but for the first, Adelaïda Ivanovna,who used to thrash him. In the evening of the same day he got drunk andabused the monks to Alyosha. He himself was far from being religious; hehad probably never put a penny candle before the image of a saint. Strangeimpulses of sudden feeling and sudden thought are common in such types.
I have mentioned already that he looked bloated. His countenance at thistime bore traces of something that testified unmistakably to the life hehad led. Besides the long fleshy bags under his little, always insolent,suspicious, and ironical eyes; besides the multitude of deep wrinkles inhis little fat face, the Adam’s apple hung below his sharp chin like agreat, fleshy goiter, which gave him a peculiar, repulsive, sensualappearance; add to that a long rapacious mouth with full lips, betweenwhich could be seen little stumps of black decayed teeth. He slobberedevery time he began to speak. He was fond indeed of making fun of his ownface, though, I believe, he was well satisfied with it. He usedparticularly to point to his nose, which was not very large, but verydelicate and conspicuously aquiline. “A regular Roman nose,” he used tosay, “with my goiter I’ve quite the countenance of an ancient Romanpatrician of the decadent period.” He seemed proud of it.
Not long after visiting his mother’s grave Alyosha suddenly announced thathe wanted to enter the monastery, and that the monks were willing toreceive him as a novice. He explained that this was his strong desire, andthat he was solemnly asking his consent as his father. The old man knewthat the elder Zossima, who was living in the monastery hermitage, hadmade a special impression upon his “gentle boy.”
“That is the most honest monk among them, of course,” he observed, afterlistening in thoughtful silence to Alyosha, and seeming scarcely surprisedat his request. “H’m!... So that’s where you want to be, my gentle boy?”
He was half drunk, and suddenly he grinned his slow half‐drunken grin,which was not without a certain cunning and tipsy slyness. “H’m!... I hada presentiment that you would end in something like this. Would youbelieve it? You were making straight for it. Well, to be sure you haveyour own two thousand. That’s a dowry for you. And I’ll never desert you,my angel. And I’ll pay what’s wanted for you there, if they ask for it.But, of course, if they don’t ask, why should we worry them? What do yousay? You know, you spend money like a canary, two grains a week. H’m!...Do you know that near one monastery there’s a place outside the town whereevery baby knows there are none but ‘the monks’ wives’ living, as they arecalled. Thirty women, I believe. I have been there myself. You know, it’sinteresting in its own way, of course, as a variety. The worst of it isit’s awfully Russian. There are no French women there. Of course theycould get them fast enough, they have plenty of money. If they get to hearof it they’ll come along. Well, there’s nothing of that sort here, no‘monks’ wives,’ and two hundred monks. They’re honest. They keep thefasts. I admit it.... H’m.... So you want to be a monk? And do you knowI’m sorry to lose you, Alyosha; would you believe it, I’ve really grownfond of you? Well, it’s a good opportunity. You’ll pray for us sinners; wehave sinned too much here. I’ve always been thinking who would pray forme, and whether there’s any one in the world to do it. My dear boy, I’mawfully stupid about that. You wouldn’t believe it. Awfully. You see,however stupid I am about it, I keep thinking, I keep thinking—from timeto time, of course, not all the while. It’s impossible, I think, for thedevils to forget to drag me down to hell with their hooks when I die. ThenI wonder—hooks? Where would they get them? What of? Iron hooks? Where dothey forge them? Have they a foundry there of some sort? The monks in themonastery probably believe that there’s a ceiling in hell, for instance.Now I’m ready to believe in hell, but without a ceiling. It makes it morerefined, more enlightened, more Lutheran that is. And, after all, whatdoes it matter whether it has a ceiling or hasn’t? But, do you know,there’s a damnable question involved in it? If there’s no ceiling therecan be no hooks, and if there are no hooks it all breaks down, which isunlikely again, for then there would be none to drag me down to hell, andif they don’t drag me down what justice is there in the world? _Ilfaudrait les inventer_, those hooks, on purpose for me alone, for, if youonly knew, Alyosha, what a blackguard I am.”
“But there are no hooks there,” said Alyosha, looking gently and seriouslyat his father.
“Yes, yes, only the shadows of hooks, I know, I know. That’s how aFrenchman described hell: ‘_J’ai bu l’ombre d’un cocher qui avec l’ombred’une brosse frottait l’ombre d’une carrosse._’ How do you know there areno hooks, darling? When you’ve lived with the monks you’ll sing adifferent tune. But go and get at the truth there, and then come and tellme. Anyway it’s easier going to the other world if one knows what there isthere. Besides, it will be more seemly for you with the monks than herewith me, with a drunken old man and young harlots ... though you’re likean angel, nothing touches you. And I dare say nothing will touch youthere. That’s why I let you go, because I hope for that. You’ve got allyour wits about you. You will burn and you will burn out; you will behealed and come back again. And I will wait for you. I feel that you’rethe only creature in the world who has not condemned me. My dear boy, Ifeel it, you know. I can’t help feeling it.”
And he even began blubbering. He was sentimental. He was wicked andsentimental.


Chapter V. Elders

Some of my readers may imagine that my young man was a sickly, ecstatic,poorly developed creature, a pale, consumptive dreamer. On the contrary,Alyosha was at this time a well‐grown, red‐cheeked, clear‐eyed lad ofnineteen, radiant with health. He was very handsome, too, graceful,moderately tall, with hair of a dark brown, with a regular, rather long,oval‐shaped face, and wide‐set dark gray, shining eyes; he was verythoughtful, and apparently very serene. I shall be told, perhaps, that redcheeks are not incompatible with fanaticism and mysticism; but I fancythat Alyosha was more of a realist than any one. Oh! no doubt, in themonastery he fully believed in miracles, but, to my thinking, miracles arenever a stumbling‐block to the realist. It is not miracles that disposerealists to belief. The genuine realist, if he is an unbeliever, willalways find strength and ability to disbelieve in the miraculous, and ifhe is confronted with a miracle as an irrefutable fact he would ratherdisbelieve his own senses than admit the fact. Even if he admits it, headmits it as a fact of nature till then unrecognized by him. Faith doesnot, in the realist, spring from the miracle but the miracle from faith.If the realist once believes, then he is bound by his very realism toadmit the miraculous also. The Apostle Thomas said that he would notbelieve till he saw, but when he did see he said, “My Lord and my God!”Was it the miracle forced him to believe? Most likely not, but he believedsolely because he desired to believe and possibly he fully believed in hissecret heart even when he said, “I do not believe till I see.”
I shall be told, perhaps, that Alyosha was stupid, undeveloped, had notfinished his studies, and so on. That he did not finish his studies istrue, but to say that he was stupid or dull would be a great injustice.I’ll simply repeat what I have said above. He entered upon this path onlybecause, at that time, it alone struck his imagination and presenteditself to him as offering an ideal means of escape for his soul fromdarkness to light. Add to that that he was to some extent a youth of ourlast epoch—that is, honest in nature, desiring the truth, seeking for itand believing in it, and seeking to serve it at once with all the strengthof his soul, seeking for immediate action, and ready to sacrificeeverything, life itself, for it. Though these young men unhappily fail tounderstand that the sacrifice of life is, in many cases, the easiest ofall sacrifices, and that to sacrifice, for instance, five or six years oftheir seething youth to hard and tedious study, if only to multiplytenfold their powers of serving the truth and the cause they have setbefore them as their goal—such a sacrifice is utterly beyond the strengthof many of them. The path Alyosha chose was a path going in the oppositedirection, but he chose it with the same thirst for swift achievement. Assoon as he reflected seriously he was convinced of the existence of Godand immortality, and at once he instinctively said to himself: “I want tolive for immortality, and I will accept no compromise.” In the same way,if he had decided that God and immortality did not exist, he would at oncehave become an atheist and a socialist. For socialism is not merely thelabor question, it is before all things the atheistic question, thequestion of the form taken by atheism to‐day, the question of the tower ofBabel built without God, not to mount to heaven from earth but to set upheaven on earth. Alyosha would have found it strange and impossible to goon living as before. It is written: “Give all that thou hast to the poorand follow Me, if thou wouldst be perfect.”
Alyosha said to himself: “I can’t give two roubles instead of ‘all,’ andonly go to mass instead of ‘following Him.’ ” Perhaps his memories ofchildhood brought back our monastery, to which his mother may have takenhim to mass. Perhaps the slanting sunlight and the holy image to which hispoor “crazy” mother had held him up still acted upon his imagination.Brooding on these things he may have come to us perhaps only to seewhether here he could sacrifice all or only “two roubles,” and in themonastery he met this elder. I must digress to explain what an “elder” isin Russian monasteries, and I am sorry that I do not feel very competentto do so. I will try, however, to give a superficial account of it in afew words. Authorities on the subject assert that the institution of“elders” is of recent date, not more than a hundred years old in ourmonasteries, though in the orthodox East, especially in Sinai and Athos,it has existed over a thousand years. It is maintained that it existed inancient times in Russia also, but through the calamities which overtookRussia—the Tartars, civil war, the interruption of relations with the Eastafter the destruction of Constantinople—this institution fell intooblivion. It was revived among us towards the end of last century by oneof the great “ascetics,” as they called him, Païssy Velitchkovsky, and hisdisciples. But to this day it exists in few monasteries only, and hassometimes been almost persecuted as an innovation in Russia. It flourishedespecially in the celebrated Kozelski Optin Monastery. When and how it wasintroduced into our monastery I cannot say. There had already been threesuch elders and Zossima was the last of them. But he was almost dying ofweakness and disease, and they had no one to take his place. The questionfor our monastery was an important one, for it had not been distinguishedby anything in particular till then: they had neither relics of saints,nor wonder‐working ikons, nor glorious traditions, nor historicalexploits. It had flourished and been glorious all over Russia through itselders, to see and hear whom pilgrims had flocked for thousands of milesfrom all parts.
What was such an elder? An elder was one who took your soul, your will,into his soul and his will. When you choose an elder, you renounce yourown will and yield it to him in complete submission, complete self‐abnegation. This novitiate, this terrible school of abnegation, isundertaken voluntarily, in the hope of self‐conquest, of self‐mastery, inorder, after a life of obedience, to attain perfect freedom, that is, fromself; to escape the lot of those who have lived their whole life withoutfinding their true selves in themselves. This institution of elders is notfounded on theory, but was established in the East from the practice of athousand years. The obligations due to an elder are not the ordinary“obedience” which has always existed in our Russian monasteries. Theobligation involves confession to the elder by all who have submittedthemselves to him, and to the indissoluble bond between him and them.
The story is told, for instance, that in the early days of Christianityone such novice, failing to fulfill some command laid upon him by hiselder, left his monastery in Syria and went to Egypt. There, after greatexploits, he was found worthy at last to suffer torture and a martyr’sdeath for the faith. When the Church, regarding him as a saint, wasburying him, suddenly, at the deacon’s exhortation, “Depart all yeunbaptized,” the coffin containing the martyr’s body left its place andwas cast forth from the church, and this took place three times. And onlyat last they learnt that this holy man had broken his vow of obedience andleft his elder, and, therefore, could not be forgiven without the elder’sabsolution in spite of his great deeds. Only after this could the funeraltake place. This, of course, is only an old legend. But here is a recentinstance.
A monk was suddenly commanded by his elder to quit Athos, which he lovedas a sacred place and a haven of refuge, and to go first to Jerusalem todo homage to the Holy Places and then to go to the north to Siberia:“There is the place for thee and not here.” The monk, overwhelmed withsorrow, went to the Œcumenical Patriarch at Constantinople and besoughthim to release him from his obedience. But the Patriarch replied that notonly was he unable to release him, but there was not and could not be onearth a power which could release him except the elder who had himselflaid that duty upon him. In this way the elders are endowed in certaincases with unbounded and inexplicable authority. That is why in many ofour monasteries the institution was at first resisted almost topersecution. Meantime the elders immediately began to be highly esteemedamong the people. Masses of the ignorant people as well as men ofdistinction flocked, for instance, to the elders of our monastery toconfess their doubts, their sins, and their sufferings, and ask forcounsel and admonition. Seeing this, the opponents of the elders declaredthat the sacrament of confession was being arbitrarily and frivolouslydegraded, though the continual opening of the heart to the elder by themonk or the layman had nothing of the character of the sacrament. In theend, however, the institution of elders has been retained and is becomingestablished in Russian monasteries. It is true, perhaps, that thisinstrument which had stood the test of a thousand years for the moralregeneration of a man from slavery to freedom and to moral perfectibilitymay be a two‐edged weapon and it may lead some not to humility andcomplete self‐control but to the most Satanic pride, that is, to bondageand not to freedom.
The elder Zossima was sixty‐five. He came of a family of landowners, hadbeen in the army in early youth, and served in the Caucasus as an officer.He had, no doubt, impressed Alyosha by some peculiar quality of his soul.Alyosha lived in the cell of the elder, who was very fond of him and lethim wait upon him. It must be noted that Alyosha was bound by noobligation and could go where he pleased and be absent for whole days.Though he wore the monastic dress it was voluntarily, not to be differentfrom others. No doubt he liked to do so. Possibly his youthful imaginationwas deeply stirred by the power and fame of his elder. It was said that somany people had for years past come to confess their sins to FatherZossima and to entreat him for words of advice and healing, that he hadacquired the keenest intuition and could tell from an unknown face what anew‐comer wanted, and what was the suffering on his conscience. Hesometimes astounded and almost alarmed his visitors by his knowledge oftheir secrets before they had spoken a word.
Alyosha noticed that many, almost all, went in to the elder for the firsttime with apprehension and uneasiness, but came out with bright and happyfaces. Alyosha was particularly struck by the fact that Father Zossima wasnot at all stern. On the contrary, he was always almost gay. The monksused to say that he was more drawn to those who were more sinful, and thegreater the sinner the more he loved him. There were, no doubt, up to theend of his life, among the monks some who hated and envied him, but theywere few in number and they were silent, though among them were some ofgreat dignity in the monastery, one, for instance, of the older monksdistinguished for his strict keeping of fasts and vows of silence. But themajority were on Father Zossima’s side and very many of them loved himwith all their hearts, warmly and sincerely. Some were almost fanaticallydevoted to him, and declared, though not quite aloud, that he was a saint,that there could be no doubt of it, and, seeing that his end was near,they anticipated miracles and great glory to the monastery in theimmediate future from his relics. Alyosha had unquestioning faith in themiraculous power of the elder, just as he had unquestioning faith in thestory of the coffin that flew out of the church. He saw many who came withsick children or relatives and besought the elder to lay hands on them andto pray over them, return shortly after—some the next day—and, falling intears at the elder’s feet, thank him for healing their sick.
Whether they had really been healed or were simply better in the naturalcourse of the disease was a question which did not exist for Alyosha, forhe fully believed in the spiritual power of his teacher and rejoiced inhis fame, in his glory, as though it were his own triumph. His heartthrobbed, and he beamed, as it were, all over when the elder came out tothe gates of the hermitage into the waiting crowd of pilgrims of thehumbler class who had flocked from all parts of Russia on purpose to seethe elder and obtain his blessing. They fell down before him, wept, kissedhis feet, kissed the earth on which he stood, and wailed, while the womenheld up their children to him and brought him the sick “possessed withdevils.” The elder spoke to them, read a brief prayer over them, blessedthem, and dismissed them. Of late he had become so weak through attacks ofillness that he was sometimes unable to leave his cell, and the pilgrimswaited for him to come out for several days. Alyosha did not wonder whythey loved him so, why they fell down before him and wept with emotionmerely at seeing his face. Oh! he understood that for the humble soul ofthe Russian peasant, worn out by grief and toil, and still more by theeverlasting injustice and everlasting sin, his own and the world’s, it wasthe greatest need and comfort to find some one or something holy to falldown before and worship.
“Among us there is sin, injustice, and temptation, but yet, somewhere onearth there is some one holy and exalted. He has the truth; he knows thetruth; so it is not dead upon the earth; so it will come one day to us,too, and rule over all the earth according to the promise.”
Alyosha knew that this was just how the people felt and even reasoned. Heunderstood it, but that the elder Zossima was this saint and custodian ofGod’s truth—of that he had no more doubt than the weeping peasants and thesick women who held out their children to the elder. The conviction thatafter his death the elder would bring extraordinary glory to the monasterywas even stronger in Alyosha than in any one there, and, of late, a kindof deep flame of inner ecstasy burnt more and more strongly in his heart.He was not at all troubled at this elder’s standing as a solitary examplebefore him.
“No matter. He is holy. He carries in his heart the secret of renewal forall: that power which will, at last, establish truth on the earth, and allmen will be holy and love one another, and there will be no more rich norpoor, no exalted nor humbled, but all will be as the children of God, andthe true Kingdom of Christ will come.” That was the dream in Alyosha’sheart.
The arrival of his two brothers, whom he had not known till then, seemedto make a great impression on Alyosha. He more quickly made friends withhis half‐brother Dmitri (though he arrived later) than with his ownbrother Ivan. He was extremely interested in his brother Ivan, but whenthe latter had been two months in the town, though they had met fairlyoften, they were still not intimate. Alyosha was naturally silent, and heseemed to be expecting something, ashamed about something, while hisbrother Ivan, though Alyosha noticed at first that he looked long andcuriously at him, seemed soon to have left off thinking of him. Alyoshanoticed it with some embarrassment. He ascribed his brother’s indifferenceat first to the disparity of their age and education. But he also wonderedwhether the absence of curiosity and sympathy in Ivan might be due to someother cause entirely unknown to him. He kept fancying that Ivan wasabsorbed in something—something inward and important—that he was strivingtowards some goal, perhaps very hard to attain, and that that was why hehad no thought for him. Alyosha wondered, too, whether there was not somecontempt on the part of the learned atheist for him—a foolish novice. Heknew for certain that his brother was an atheist. He could not takeoffense at this contempt, if it existed; yet, with an uneasy embarrassmentwhich he did not himself understand, he waited for his brother to comenearer to him. Dmitri used to speak of Ivan with the deepest respect andwith a peculiar earnestness. From him Alyosha learnt all the details ofthe important affair which had of late formed such a close and remarkablebond between the two elder brothers. Dmitri’s enthusiastic references toIvan were the more striking in Alyosha’s eyes since Dmitri was, comparedwith Ivan, almost uneducated, and the two brothers were such a contrast inpersonality and character that it would be difficult to find two men moreunlike.
It was at this time that the meeting, or, rather gathering of the membersof this inharmonious family took place in the cell of the elder who hadsuch an extraordinary influence on Alyosha. The pretext for this gatheringwas a false one. It was at this time that the discord between Dmitri andhis father seemed at its acutest stage and their relations had becomeinsufferably strained. Fyodor Pavlovitch seems to have been the first tosuggest, apparently in joke, that they should all meet in Father Zossima’scell, and that, without appealing to his direct intervention, they mightmore decently come to an understanding under the conciliating influence ofthe elder’s presence. Dmitri, who had never seen the elder, naturallysupposed that his father was trying to intimidate him, but, as he secretlyblamed himself for his outbursts of temper with his father on severalrecent occasions, he accepted the challenge. It must be noted that he wasnot, like Ivan, staying with his father, but living apart at the other endof the town. It happened that Pyotr Alexandrovitch Miüsov, who was stayingin the district at the time, caught eagerly at the idea. A Liberal of theforties and fifties, a freethinker and atheist, he may have been led on byboredom or the hope of frivolous diversion. He was suddenly seized withthe desire to see the monastery and the holy man. As his lawsuit with themonastery still dragged on, he made it the pretext for seeing theSuperior, in order to attempt to settle it amicably. A visitor coming withsuch laudable intentions might be received with more attention andconsideration than if he came from simple curiosity. Influences fromwithin the monastery were brought to bear on the elder, who of late hadscarcely left his cell, and had been forced by illness to deny even hisordinary visitors. In the end he consented to see them, and the day wasfixed.
“Who has made me a judge over them?” was all he said, smilingly, toAlyosha.
Alyosha was much perturbed when he heard of the proposed visit. Of all thewrangling, quarrelsome party, Dmitri was the only one who could regard theinterview seriously. All the others would come from frivolous motives,perhaps insulting to the elder. Alyosha was well aware of that. Ivan andMiüsov would come from curiosity, perhaps of the coarsest kind, while hisfather might be contemplating some piece of buffoonery. Though he saidnothing, Alyosha thoroughly understood his father. The boy, I repeat, wasfar from being so simple as every one thought him. He awaited the day witha heavy heart. No doubt he was always pondering in his mind how the familydiscord could be ended. But his chief anxiety concerned the elder. Hetrembled for him, for his glory, and dreaded any affront to him,especially the refined, courteous irony of Miüsov and the supercilioushalf‐utterances of the highly educated Ivan. He even wanted to venture onwarning the elder, telling him something about them, but, on secondthoughts, said nothing. He only sent word the day before, through afriend, to his brother Dmitri, that he loved him and expected him to keephis promise. Dmitri wondered, for he could not remember what he hadpromised, but he answered by letter that he would do his utmost not to lethimself be provoked “by vileness,” but that, although he had a deeprespect for the elder and for his brother Ivan, he was convinced that themeeting was either a trap for him or an unworthy farce.
“Nevertheless I would rather bite out my tongue than be lacking in respectto the sainted man whom you reverence so highly,” he wrote in conclusion.Alyosha was not greatly cheered by the letter.



Book II. An Unfortunate Gathering


Chapter I. They Arrive At The Monastery

It was a warm, bright day at the end of August. The interview with theelder had been fixed for half‐past eleven, immediately after late mass.Our visitors did not take part in the service, but arrived just as it wasover. First an elegant open carriage, drawn by two valuable horses, droveup with Miüsov and a distant relative of his, a young man of twenty,called Pyotr Fomitch Kalganov. This young man was preparing to enter theuniversity. Miüsov, with whom he was staying for the time, was trying topersuade him to go abroad to the university of Zurich or Jena. The youngman was still undecided. He was thoughtful and absent‐minded. He was nice‐looking, strongly built, and rather tall. There was a strange fixity inhis gaze at times. Like all very absent‐minded people he would sometimesstare at a person without seeing him. He was silent and rather awkward,but sometimes, when he was alone with any one, he became talkative andeffusive, and would laugh at anything or nothing. But his animationvanished as quickly as it appeared. He was always well and evenelaborately dressed; he had already some independent fortune andexpectations of much more. He was a friend of Alyosha’s.
In an ancient, jolting, but roomy, hired carriage, with a pair of oldpinkish‐gray horses, a long way behind Miüsov’s carriage, came FyodorPavlovitch, with his son Ivan. Dmitri was late, though he had beeninformed of the time the evening before. The visitors left their carriageat the hotel, outside the precincts, and went to the gates of themonastery on foot. Except Fyodor Pavlovitch, none of the party had everseen the monastery, and Miüsov had probably not even been to church forthirty years. He looked about him with curiosity, together with assumedease. But, except the church and the domestic buildings, though these toowere ordinary enough, he found nothing of interest in the interior of themonastery. The last of the worshippers were coming out of the church,bareheaded and crossing themselves. Among the humbler people were a few ofhigher rank—two or three ladies and a very old general. They were allstaying at the hotel. Our visitors were at once surrounded by beggars, butnone of them gave them anything, except young Kalganov, who took a ten‐copeck piece out of his purse, and, nervous and embarrassed—God knowswhy!—hurriedly gave it to an old woman, saying: “Divide it equally.” Noneof his companions made any remark upon it, so that he had no reason to beembarrassed; but, perceiving this, he was even more overcome.
It was strange that their arrival did not seem expected, and that theywere not received with special honor, though one of them had recently madea donation of a thousand roubles, while another was a very wealthy andhighly cultured landowner, upon whom all in the monastery were in a sensedependent, as a decision of the lawsuit might at any moment put theirfishing rights in his hands. Yet no official personage met them.
Miüsov looked absent‐mindedly at the tombstones round the church, and wason the point of saying that the dead buried here must have paid a prettypenny for the right of lying in this “holy place,” but refrained. Hisliberal irony was rapidly changing almost into anger.
“Who the devil is there to ask in this imbecile place? We must find out,for time is passing,” he observed suddenly, as though speaking to himself.
All at once there came up a bald‐headed, elderly man with ingratiatinglittle eyes, wearing a full, summer overcoat. Lifting his hat, heintroduced himself with a honeyed lisp as Maximov, a landowner of Tula. Heat once entered into our visitors’ difficulty.
“Father Zossima lives in the hermitage, apart, four hundred paces from themonastery, the other side of the copse.”
“I know it’s the other side of the copse,” observed Fyodor Pavlovitch,“but we don’t remember the way. It is a long time since we’ve been here.”
“This way, by this gate, and straight across the copse ... the copse. Comewith me, won’t you? I’ll show you. I have to go.... I am going myself.This way, this way.”
They came out of the gate and turned towards the copse. Maximov, a man ofsixty, ran rather than walked, turning sideways to stare at them all, withan incredible degree of nervous curiosity. His eyes looked starting out ofhis head.
“You see, we have come to the elder upon business of our own,” observedMiüsov severely. “That personage has granted us an audience, so to speak,and so, though we thank you for showing us the way, we cannot ask you toaccompany us.”
“I’ve been there. I’ve been already; _un chevalier parfait_,” and Maximovsnapped his fingers in the air.
“Who is a _chevalier_?” asked Miüsov.
“The elder, the splendid elder, the elder! The honor and glory of themonastery, Zossima. Such an elder!”
But his incoherent talk was cut short by a very pale, wan‐looking monk ofmedium height, wearing a monk’s cap, who overtook them. Fyodor Pavlovitchand Miüsov stopped.
The monk, with an extremely courteous, profound bow, announced:
“The Father Superior invites all of you gentlemen to dine with him afteryour visit to the hermitage. At one o’clock, not later. And you also,” headded, addressing Maximov.
“That I certainly will, without fail,” cried Fyodor Pavlovitch, hugelydelighted at the invitation. “And, believe me, we’ve all given our word tobehave properly here.... And you, Pyotr Alexandrovitch, will you go, too?”
“Yes, of course. What have I come for but to study all the customs here?The only obstacle to me is your company....”
“Yes, Dmitri Fyodorovitch is non‐existent as yet.”
“It would be a capital thing if he didn’t turn up. Do you suppose I likeall this business, and in your company, too? So we will come to dinner.Thank the Father Superior,” he said to the monk.
“No, it is my duty now to conduct you to the elder,” answered the monk.
“If so I’ll go straight to the Father Superior—to the Father Superior,”babbled Maximov.
“The Father Superior is engaged just now. But as you please—” the monkhesitated.
“Impertinent old man!” Miüsov observed aloud, while Maximov ran back tothe monastery.
“He’s like von Sohn,” Fyodor Pavlovitch said suddenly.
“Is that all you can think of?... In what way is he like von Sohn? Haveyou ever seen von Sohn?”
“I’ve seen his portrait. It’s not the features, but something indefinable.He’s a second von Sohn. I can always tell from the physiognomy.”
“Ah, I dare say you are a connoisseur in that. But, look here, FyodorPavlovitch, you said just now that we had given our word to behaveproperly. Remember it. I advise you to control yourself. But, if you beginto play the fool I don’t intend to be associated with you here.... You seewhat a man he is”—he turned to the monk—“I’m afraid to go among decentpeople with him.” A fine smile, not without a certain slyness, came on tothe pale, bloodless lips of the monk, but he made no reply, and wasevidently silent from a sense of his own dignity. Miüsov frowned more thanever.
“Oh, devil take them all! An outer show elaborated through centuries, andnothing but charlatanism and nonsense underneath,” flashed throughMiüsov’s mind.
“Here’s the hermitage. We’ve arrived,” cried Fyodor Pavlovitch. “The gatesare shut.”
And he repeatedly made the sign of the cross to the saints painted aboveand on the sides of the gates.
“When you go to Rome you must do as the Romans do. Here in this hermitagethere are twenty‐five saints being saved. They look at one another, andeat cabbages. And not one woman goes in at this gate. That’s what isremarkable. And that really is so. But I did hear that the elder receivesladies,” he remarked suddenly to the monk.
“Women of the people are here too now, lying in the portico there waiting.But for ladies of higher rank two rooms have been built adjoining theportico, but outside the precincts—you can see the windows—and the eldergoes out to them by an inner passage when he is well enough. They arealways outside the precincts. There is a Harkov lady, Madame Hohlakov,waiting there now with her sick daughter. Probably he has promised to comeout to her, though of late he has been so weak that he has hardly shownhimself even to the people.”
“So then there are loopholes, after all, to creep out of the hermitage tothe ladies. Don’t suppose, holy father, that I mean any harm. But do youknow that at Athos not only the visits of women are not allowed, but nocreature of the female sex—no hens, nor turkey‐hens, nor cows.”
“Fyodor Pavlovitch, I warn you I shall go back and leave you here. They’llturn you out when I’m gone.”
“But I’m not interfering with you, Pyotr Alexandrovitch. Look,” he criedsuddenly, stepping within the precincts, “what a vale of roses they livein!”
Though there were no roses now, there were numbers of rare and beautifulautumn flowers growing wherever there was space for them, and evidentlytended by a skillful hand; there were flower‐beds round the church, andbetween the tombs; and the one‐storied wooden house where the elder livedwas also surrounded with flowers.
“And was it like this in the time of the last elder, Varsonofy? He didn’tcare for such elegance. They say he used to jump up and thrash even ladieswith a stick,” observed Fyodor Pavlovitch, as he went up the steps.
“The elder Varsonofy did sometimes seem rather strange, but a great dealthat’s told is foolishness. He never thrashed any one,” answered the monk.“Now, gentlemen, if you will wait a minute I will announce you.”
“Fyodor Pavlovitch, for the last time, your compact, do you hear? Behaveproperly or I will pay you out!” Miüsov had time to mutter again.
“I can’t think why you are so agitated,” Fyodor Pavlovitch observedsarcastically. “Are you uneasy about your sins? They say he can tell byone’s eyes what one has come about. And what a lot you think of theiropinion! you, a Parisian, and so advanced. I’m surprised at you.”
But Miüsov had no time to reply to this sarcasm. They were asked to comein. He walked in, somewhat irritated.
“Now, I know myself, I am annoyed, I shall lose my temper and begin toquarrel—and lower myself and my ideas,” he reflected.


Chapter II. The Old Buffoon

They entered the room almost at the same moment that the elder came infrom his bedroom. There were already in the cell, awaiting the elder, twomonks of the hermitage, one the Father Librarian, and the other FatherPaïssy, a very learned man, so they said, in delicate health, though notold. There was also a tall young man, who looked about two and twenty,standing in the corner throughout the interview. He had a broad, freshface, and clever, observant, narrow brown eyes, and was wearing ordinarydress. He was a divinity student, living under the protection of themonastery. His expression was one of unquestioning, but self‐respecting,reverence. Being in a subordinate and dependent position, and so not on anequality with the guests, he did not greet them with a bow.
Father Zossima was accompanied by a novice, and by Alyosha. The two monksrose and greeted him with a very deep bow, touching the ground with theirfingers; then kissed his hand. Blessing them, the elder replied with asdeep a reverence to them, and asked their blessing. The whole ceremony wasperformed very seriously and with an appearance of feeling, not like aneveryday rite. But Miüsov fancied that it was all done with intentionalimpressiveness. He stood in front of the other visitors. He ought—he hadreflected upon it the evening before—from simple politeness, since it wasthe custom here, to have gone up to receive the elder’s blessing, even ifhe did not kiss his hand. But when he saw all this bowing and kissing onthe part of the monks he instantly changed his mind. With dignifiedgravity he made a rather deep, conventional bow, and moved away to achair. Fyodor Pavlovitch did the same, mimicking Miüsov like an ape. Ivanbowed with great dignity and courtesy, but he too kept his hands at hissides, while Kalganov was so confused that he did not bow at all. Theelder let fall the hand raised to bless them, and bowing to them again,asked them all to sit down. The blood rushed to Alyosha’s cheeks. He wasashamed. His forebodings were coming true.
Father Zossima sat down on a very old‐fashioned mahogany sofa, coveredwith leather, and made his visitors sit down in a row along the oppositewall on four mahogany chairs, covered with shabby black leather. The monkssat, one at the door and the other at the window. The divinity student,the novice, and Alyosha remained standing. The cell was not very large andhad a faded look. It contained nothing but the most necessary furniture,of coarse and poor quality. There were two pots of flowers in the window,and a number of holy pictures in the corner. Before one huge ancient ikonof the Virgin a lamp was burning. Near it were two other holy pictures inshining settings, and, next them, carved cherubims, china eggs, a Catholiccross of ivory, with a Mater Dolorosa embracing it, and several foreignengravings from the great Italian artists of past centuries. Next to thesecostly and artistic engravings were several of the roughest Russian printsof saints and martyrs, such as are sold for a few farthings at all thefairs. On the other walls were portraits of Russian bishops, past andpresent.
Miüsov took a cursory glance at all these “conventional” surroundings andbent an intent look upon the elder. He had a high opinion of his owninsight, a weakness excusable in him as he was fifty, an age at which aclever man of the world of established position can hardly help takinghimself rather seriously. At the first moment he did not like Zossima.There was, indeed, something in the elder’s face which many people besidesMiüsov might not have liked. He was a short, bent, little man, with veryweak legs, and though he was only sixty‐five, he looked at least ten yearsolder. His face was very thin and covered with a network of fine wrinkles,particularly numerous about his eyes, which were small, light‐colored,quick, and shining like two bright points. He had a sprinkling of grayhair about his temples. His pointed beard was small and scanty, and hislips, which smiled frequently, were as thin as two threads. His nose wasnot long, but sharp, like a bird’s beak.
“To all appearances a malicious soul, full of petty pride,” thoughtMiüsov. He felt altogether dissatisfied with his position.
A cheap little clock on the wall struck twelve hurriedly, and served tobegin the conversation.
“Precisely to our time,” cried Fyodor Pavlovitch, “but no sign of my son,Dmitri. I apologize for him, sacred elder!” (Alyosha shuddered all over at“sacred elder.”) “I am always punctual myself, minute for minute,remembering that punctuality is the courtesy of kings....”
“But you are not a king, anyway,” Miüsov muttered, losing his self‐restraint at once.
“Yes; that’s true. I’m not a king, and, would you believe it, PyotrAlexandrovitch, I was aware of that myself. But, there! I always say thewrong thing. Your reverence,” he cried, with sudden pathos, “you beholdbefore you a buffoon in earnest! I introduce myself as such. It’s an oldhabit, alas! And if I sometimes talk nonsense out of place it’s with anobject, with the object of amusing people and making myself agreeable. Onemust be agreeable, mustn’t one? I was seven years ago in a little townwhere I had business, and I made friends with some merchants there. Wewent to the captain of police because we had to see him about something,and to ask him to dine with us. He was a tall, fat, fair, sulky man, themost dangerous type in such cases. It’s their liver. I went straight up tohim, and with the ease of a man of the world, you know, ‘Mr. Ispravnik,’said I, ‘be our Napravnik.’ ‘What do you mean by Napravnik?’ said he. Isaw, at the first half‐second, that it had missed fire. He stood there soglum. ‘I wanted to make a joke,’ said I, ‘for the general diversion, asMr. Napravnik is our well‐known Russian orchestra conductor and what weneed for the harmony of our undertaking is some one of that sort.’ And Iexplained my comparison very reasonably, didn’t I? ‘Excuse me,’ said he,‘I am an Ispravnik, and I do not allow puns to be made on my calling.’ Heturned and walked away. I followed him, shouting, ‘Yes, yes, you are anIspravnik, not a Napravnik.’ ‘No,’ he said, ‘since you called me aNapravnik I am one.’ And would you believe it, it ruined our business! AndI’m always like that, always like that. Always injuring myself with mypoliteness. Once, many years ago, I said to an influential person: ‘Yourwife is a ticklish lady,’ in an honorable sense, of the moral qualities,so to speak. But he asked me, ‘Why, have you tickled her?’ I thought I’dbe polite, so I couldn’t help saying, ‘Yes,’ and he gave me a finetickling on the spot. Only that happened long ago, so I’m not ashamed totell the story. I’m always injuring myself like that.”
“You’re doing it now,” muttered Miüsov, with disgust.
Father Zossima scrutinized them both in silence.
“Am I? Would you believe it, I was aware of that, too, PyotrAlexandrovitch, and let me tell you, indeed, I foresaw I should as soon asI began to speak. And do you know I foresaw, too, that you’d be the firstto remark on it. The minute I see my joke isn’t coming off, yourreverence, both my cheeks feel as though they were drawn down to the lowerjaw and there is almost a spasm in them. That’s been so since I was young,when I had to make jokes for my living in noblemen’s families. I am aninveterate buffoon, and have been from birth up, your reverence, it’s asthough it were a craze in me. I dare say it’s a devil within me. But onlya little one. A more serious one would have chosen another lodging. Butnot your soul, Pyotr Alexandrovitch; you’re not a lodging worth havingeither. But I do believe—I believe in God, though I have had doubts oflate. But now I sit and await words of wisdom. I’m like the philosopher,Diderot, your reverence. Did you ever hear, most Holy Father, how Diderotwent to see the Metropolitan Platon, in the time of the Empress Catherine?He went in and said straight out, ‘There is no God.’ To which the greatbishop lifted up his finger and answered, ‘The fool hath said in his heartthere is no God.’ And he fell down at his feet on the spot. ‘I believe,’he cried, ‘and will be christened.’ And so he was. Princess Dashkov washis godmother, and Potyomkin his godfather.”
“Fyodor Pavlovitch, this is unbearable! You know you’re telling lies andthat that stupid anecdote isn’t true. Why are you playing the fool?” criedMiüsov in a shaking voice.
“I suspected all my life that it wasn’t true,” Fyodor Pavlovitch criedwith conviction. “But I’ll tell you the whole truth, gentlemen. Greatelder! Forgive me, the last thing about Diderot’s christening I made upjust now. I never thought of it before. I made it up to add piquancy. Iplay the fool, Pyotr Alexandrovitch, to make myself agreeable. Though Ireally don’t know myself, sometimes, what I do it for. And as for Diderot,I heard as far as ‘the fool hath said in his heart’ twenty times from thegentry about here when I was young. I heard your aunt, PyotrAlexandrovitch, tell the story. They all believe to this day that theinfidel Diderot came to dispute about God with the MetropolitanPlaton....”
Miüsov got up, forgetting himself in his impatience. He was furious, andconscious of being ridiculous.
What was taking place in the cell was really incredible. For forty orfifty years past, from the times of former elders, no visitors had enteredthat cell without feelings of the profoundest veneration. Almost every oneadmitted to the cell felt that a great favor was being shown him. Manyremained kneeling during the whole visit. Of those visitors, many had beenmen of high rank and learning, some even freethinkers, attracted bycuriosity, but all without exception had shown the profoundest reverenceand delicacy, for here there was no question of money, but only, on theone side love and kindness, and on the other penitence and eager desire todecide some spiritual problem or crisis. So that such buffoonery amazedand bewildered the spectators, or at least some of them. The monks, withunchanged countenances, waited, with earnest attention, to hear what theelder would say, but seemed on the point of standing up, like Miüsov.Alyosha stood, with hanging head, on the verge of tears. What seemed tohim strangest of all was that his brother Ivan, on whom alone he hadrested his hopes, and who alone had such influence on his father that hecould have stopped him, sat now quite unmoved, with downcast eyes,apparently waiting with interest to see how it would end, as though he hadnothing to do with it. Alyosha did not dare to look at Rakitin, thedivinity student, whom he knew almost intimately. He alone in themonastery knew Rakitin’s thoughts.
“Forgive me,” began Miüsov, addressing Father Zossima, “for perhaps I seemto be taking part in this shameful foolery. I made a mistake in believingthat even a man like Fyodor Pavlovitch would understand what was due on avisit to so honored a personage. I did not suppose I should have toapologize simply for having come with him....”
Pyotr Alexandrovitch could say no more, and was about to leave the room,overwhelmed with confusion.
“Don’t distress yourself, I beg.” The elder got on to his feeble legs, andtaking Pyotr Alexandrovitch by both hands, made him sit down again. “I begyou not to disturb yourself. I particularly beg you to be my guest.” Andwith a bow he went back and sat down again on his little sofa.
“Great elder, speak! Do I annoy you by my vivacity?” Fyodor Pavlovitchcried suddenly, clutching the arms of his chair in both hands, as thoughready to leap up from it if the answer were unfavorable.
“I earnestly beg you, too, not to disturb yourself, and not to be uneasy,”the elder said impressively. “Do not trouble. Make yourself quite at home.And, above all, do not be so ashamed of yourself, for that is at the rootof it all.”
“Quite at home? To be my natural self? Oh, that is much too much, but Iaccept it with grateful joy. Do you know, blessed Father, you’d better notinvite me to be my natural self. Don’t risk it.... I will not go so far asthat myself. I warn you for your own sake. Well, the rest is still plungedin the mists of uncertainty, though there are people who’d be pleased todescribe me for you. I mean that for you, Pyotr Alexandrovitch. But as foryou, holy being, let me tell you, I am brimming over with ecstasy.”
He got up, and throwing up his hands, declaimed, “Blessed be the womb thatbare thee, and the paps that gave thee suck—the paps especially. When yousaid just now, ‘Don’t be so ashamed of yourself, for that is at the rootof it all,’ you pierced right through me by that remark, and read me tothe core. Indeed, I always feel when I meet people that I am lower thanall, and that they all take me for a buffoon. So I say, ‘Let me reallyplay the buffoon. I am not afraid of your opinion, for you are every oneof you worse than I am.’ That is why I am a buffoon. It is from shame,great elder, from shame; it’s simply over‐sensitiveness that makes merowdy. If I had only been sure that every one would accept me as thekindest and wisest of men, oh, Lord, what a good man I should have beenthen! Teacher!” he fell suddenly on his knees, “what must I do to gaineternal life?”
It was difficult even now to decide whether he was joking or really moved.
Father Zossima, lifting his eyes, looked at him, and said with a smile:
“You have known for a long time what you must do. You have sense enough:don’t give way to drunkenness and incontinence of speech; don’t give wayto sensual lust; and, above all, to the love of money. And close yourtaverns. If you can’t close all, at least two or three. And, aboveall—don’t lie.”
“You mean about Diderot?”
“No, not about Diderot. Above all, don’t lie to yourself. The man who liesto himself and listens to his own lie comes to such a pass that he cannotdistinguish the truth within him, or around him, and so loses all respectfor himself and for others. And having no respect he ceases to love, andin order to occupy and distract himself without love he gives way topassions and coarse pleasures, and sinks to bestiality in his vices, allfrom continual lying to other men and to himself. The man who lies tohimself can be more easily offended than any one. You know it is sometimesvery pleasant to take offense, isn’t it? A man may know that nobody hasinsulted him, but that he has invented the insult for himself, has liedand exaggerated to make it picturesque, has caught at a word and made amountain out of a molehill—he knows that himself, yet he will be the firstto take offense, and will revel in his resentment till he feels greatpleasure in it, and so pass to genuine vindictiveness. But get up, sitdown, I beg you. All this, too, is deceitful posturing....”
“Blessed man! Give me your hand to kiss.”
Fyodor Pavlovitch skipped up, and imprinted a rapid kiss on the elder’sthin hand. “It is, it is pleasant to take offense. You said that so well,as I never heard it before. Yes, I have been all my life taking offense,to please myself, taking offense on esthetic grounds, for it is not somuch pleasant as distinguished sometimes to be insulted—that you hadforgotten, great elder, it is distinguished! I shall make a note of that.But I have been lying, lying positively my whole life long, every day andhour of it. Of a truth, I am a lie, and the father of lies. Though Ibelieve I am not the father of lies. I am getting mixed in my texts. Say,the son of lies, and that will be enough. Only ... my angel ... I maysometimes talk about Diderot! Diderot will do no harm, though sometimes aword will do harm. Great elder, by the way, I was forgetting, though I hadbeen meaning for the last two years to come here on purpose to ask and tofind out something. Only do tell Pyotr Alexandrovitch not to interrupt me.Here is my question: Is it true, great Father, that the story is toldsomewhere in the _Lives of the Saints_ of a holy saint martyred for hisfaith who, when his head was cut off at last, stood up, picked up hishead, and, ‘courteously kissing it,’ walked a long way, carrying it in hishands. Is that true or not, honored Father?”
“No, it is untrue,” said the elder.
“There is nothing of the kind in all the lives of the saints. What saintdo you say the story is told of?” asked the Father Librarian.
“I do not know what saint. I do not know, and can’t tell. I was deceived.I was told the story. I had heard it, and do you know who told it? PyotrAlexandrovitch Miüsov here, who was so angry just now about Diderot. He itwas who told the story.”
“I have never told it you, I never speak to you at all.”
“It is true you did not tell me, but you told it when I was present. Itwas three years ago. I mentioned it because by that ridiculous story youshook my faith, Pyotr Alexandrovitch. You knew nothing of it, but I wenthome with my faith shaken, and I have been getting more and more shakenever since. Yes, Pyotr Alexandrovitch, you were the cause of a great fall.That was not a Diderot!”
Fyodor Pavlovitch got excited and pathetic, though it was perfectly clearto every one by now that he was playing a part again. Yet Miüsov was stungby his words.
“What nonsense, and it is all nonsense,” he muttered. “I may really havetold it, some time or other ... but not to you. I was told it myself. Iheard it in Paris from a Frenchman. He told me it was read at our massfrom the _Lives of the Saints_ ... he was a very learned man who had madea special study of Russian statistics and had lived a long time inRussia.... I have not read the _Lives of the Saints_ myself, and I am notgoing to read them ... all sorts of things are said at dinner—we weredining then.”
“Yes, you were dining then, and so I lost my faith!” said FyodorPavlovitch, mimicking him.
“What do I care for your faith?” Miüsov was on the point of shouting, buthe suddenly checked himself, and said with contempt, “You defileeverything you touch.”
The elder suddenly rose from his seat. “Excuse me, gentlemen, for leavingyou a few minutes,” he said, addressing all his guests. “I have visitorsawaiting me who arrived before you. But don’t you tell lies all the same,”he added, turning to Fyodor Pavlovitch with a good‐humored face. He wentout of the cell. Alyosha and the novice flew to escort him down the steps.Alyosha was breathless: he was glad to get away, but he was glad, too,that the elder was good‐humored and not offended. Father Zossima was goingtowards the portico to bless the people waiting for him there. But FyodorPavlovitch persisted in stopping him at the door of the cell.
“Blessed man!” he cried, with feeling. “Allow me to kiss your hand oncemore. Yes, with you I could still talk, I could still get on. Do you thinkI always lie and play the fool like this? Believe me, I have been actinglike this all the time on purpose to try you. I have been testing you allthe time to see whether I could get on with you. Is there room for myhumility beside your pride? I am ready to give you a testimonial that onecan get on with you! But now, I’ll be quiet; I will keep quiet all thetime. I’ll sit in a chair and hold my tongue. Now it is for you to speak,Pyotr Alexandrovitch. You are the principal person left now—for tenminutes.”


Chapter III. Peasant Women Who Have Faith

Near the wooden portico below, built on to the outer wall of the precinct,there was a crowd of about twenty peasant women. They had been told thatthe elder was at last coming out, and they had gathered together inanticipation. Two ladies, Madame Hohlakov and her daughter, had also comeout into the portico to wait for the elder, but in a separate part of itset aside for women of rank.
Madame Hohlakov was a wealthy lady, still young and attractive, and alwaysdressed with taste. She was rather pale, and had lively black eyes. Shewas not more than thirty‐three, and had been five years a widow. Herdaughter, a girl of fourteen, was partially paralyzed. The poor child hadnot been able to walk for the last six months, and was wheeled about in along reclining chair. She had a charming little face, rather thin fromillness, but full of gayety. There was a gleam of mischief in her big darkeyes with their long lashes. Her mother had been intending to take herabroad ever since the spring, but they had been detained all the summer bybusiness connected with their estate. They had been staying a week in ourtown, where they had come more for purposes of business than devotion, buthad visited Father Zossima once already, three days before. Though theyknew that the elder scarcely saw any one, they had now suddenly turned upagain, and urgently entreated “the happiness of looking once again on thegreat healer.”
The mother was sitting on a chair by the side of her daughter’s invalidcarriage, and two paces from her stood an old monk, not one of ourmonastery, but a visitor from an obscure religious house in the far north.He too sought the elder’s blessing.
But Father Zossima, on entering the portico, went first straight to thepeasants who were crowded at the foot of the three steps that led up intothe portico. Father Zossima stood on the top step, put on his stole, andbegan blessing the women who thronged about him. One crazy woman was ledup to him. As soon as she caught sight of the elder she began shriekingand writhing as though in the pains of childbirth. Laying the stole on herforehead, he read a short prayer over her, and she was at once soothed andquieted.
I do not know how it may be now, but in my childhood I often happened tosee and hear these “possessed” women in the villages and monasteries. Theyused to be brought to mass; they would squeal and bark like a dog so thatthey were heard all over the church. But when the sacrament was carried inand they were led up to it, at once the “possession” ceased, and the sickwomen were always soothed for a time. I was greatly impressed and amazedat this as a child; but then I heard from country neighbors and from mytown teachers that the whole illness was simulated to avoid work, and thatit could always be cured by suitable severity; various anecdotes were toldto confirm this. But later on I learnt with astonishment from medicalspecialists that there is no pretense about it, that it is a terribleillness to which women are subject, specially prevalent among us inRussia, and that it is due to the hard lot of the peasant women. It is adisease, I was told, arising from exhausting toil too soon after hard,abnormal and unassisted labor in childbirth, and from the hopeless misery,from beatings, and so on, which some women were not able to endure likeothers. The strange and instant healing of the frantic and strugglingwoman as soon as she was led up to the holy sacrament, which had beenexplained to me as due to malingering and the trickery of the “clericals,”arose probably in the most natural manner. Both the women who supportedher and the invalid herself fully believed as a truth beyond question thatthe evil spirit in possession of her could not hold out if the sick womanwere brought to the sacrament and made to bow down before it. And so, witha nervous and psychically deranged woman, a sort of convulsion of thewhole organism always took place, and was bound to take place, at themoment of bowing down to the sacrament, aroused by the expectation of themiracle of healing and the implicit belief that it would come to pass; andit did come to pass, though only for a moment. It was exactly the same nowas soon as the elder touched the sick woman with the stole.
Many of the women in the crowd were moved to tears of ecstasy by theeffect of the moment: some strove to kiss the hem of his garment, otherscried out in sing‐song voices.
He blessed them all and talked with some of them. The “possessed” woman heknew already. She came from a village only six versts from the monastery,and had been brought to him before.
“But here is one from afar.” He pointed to a woman by no means old butvery thin and wasted, with a face not merely sunburnt but almost blackenedby exposure. She was kneeling and gazing with a fixed stare at the elder;there was something almost frenzied in her eyes.
“From afar off, Father, from afar off! From two hundred miles from here.From afar off, Father, from afar off!” the woman began in a sing‐songvoice as though she were chanting a dirge, swaying her head from side toside with her cheek resting in her hand.
There is silent and long‐suffering sorrow to be met with among thepeasantry. It withdraws into itself and is still. But there is a griefthat breaks out, and from that minute it bursts into tears and finds ventin wailing. This is particularly common with women. But it is no lighter agrief than the silent. Lamentations comfort only by lacerating the heartstill more. Such grief does not desire consolation. It feeds on the senseof its hopelessness. Lamentations spring only from the constant craving toreopen the wound.
“You are of the tradesman class?” said Father Zossima, looking curiouslyat her.
“Townfolk we are, Father, townfolk. Yet we are peasants though we live inthe town. I have come to see you, O Father! We heard of you, Father, weheard of you. I have buried my little son, and I have come on apilgrimage. I have been in three monasteries, but they told me, ‘Go,Nastasya, go to them’—that is to you. I have come; I was yesterday at theservice, and to‐day I have come to you.”
“What are you weeping for?”
“It’s my little son I’m grieving for, Father. He was three years old—threeyears all but three months. For my little boy, Father, I’m in anguish, formy little boy. He was the last one left. We had four, my Nikita and I, andnow we’ve no children, our dear ones have all gone. I buried the firstthree without grieving overmuch, and now I have buried the last I can’tforget him. He seems always standing before me. He never leaves me. He haswithered my heart. I look at his little clothes, his little shirt, hislittle boots, and I wail. I lay out all that is left of him, all hislittle things. I look at them and wail. I say to Nikita, my husband, ‘Letme go on a pilgrimage, master.’ He is a driver. We’re not poor people,Father, not poor; he drives our own horse. It’s all our own, the horse andthe carriage. And what good is it all to us now? My Nikita has begundrinking while I am away. He’s sure to. It used to be so before. As soonas I turn my back he gives way to it. But now I don’t think about him.It’s three months since I left home. I’ve forgotten him. I’ve forgotteneverything. I don’t want to remember. And what would our life be nowtogether? I’ve done with him, I’ve done. I’ve done with them all. I don’tcare to look upon my house and my goods. I don’t care to see anything atall!”
“Listen, mother,” said the elder. “Once in olden times a holy saint saw inthe Temple a mother like you weeping for her little one, her only one,whom God had taken. ‘Knowest thou not,’ said the saint to her, ‘how boldthese little ones are before the throne of God? Verily there are nonebolder than they in the Kingdom of Heaven. “Thou didst give us life, OLord,” they say, “and scarcely had we looked upon it when Thou didst takeit back again.” And so boldly they ask and ask again that God gives themat once the rank of angels. Therefore,’ said the saint, ‘thou, too, Omother, rejoice and weep not, for thy little son is with the Lord in thefellowship of the angels.’ That’s what the saint said to the weepingmother of old. He was a great saint and he could not have spoken falsely.Therefore you too, mother, know that your little one is surely before thethrone of God, is rejoicing and happy, and praying to God for you, andtherefore weep not, but rejoice.”
The woman listened to him, looking down with her cheek in her hand. Shesighed deeply.
“My Nikita tried to comfort me with the same words as you. ‘Foolish one,’he said, ‘why weep? Our son is no doubt singing with the angels beforeGod.’ He says that to me, but he weeps himself. I see that he cries likeme. ‘I know, Nikita,’ said I. ‘Where could he be if not with the Lord God?Only, here with us now he is not as he used to sit beside us before.’ Andif only I could look upon him one little time, if only I could peep at himone little time, without going up to him, without speaking, if I could behidden in a corner and only see him for one little minute, hear himplaying in the yard, calling in his little voice, ‘Mammy, where are you?’If only I could hear him pattering with his little feet about the roomjust once, only once; for so often, so often I remember how he used to runto me and shout and laugh, if only I could hear his little feet I shouldknow him! But he’s gone, Father, he’s gone, and I shall never hear himagain. Here’s his little sash, but him I shall never see or hear now.”
She drew out of her bosom her boy’s little embroidered sash, and as soonas she looked at it she began shaking with sobs, hiding her eyes with herfingers through which the tears flowed in a sudden stream.
“It is Rachel of old,” said the elder, “weeping for her children, and willnot be comforted because they are not. Such is the lot set on earth foryou mothers. Be not comforted. Consolation is not what you need. Weep andbe not consoled, but weep. Only every time that you weep be sure toremember that your little son is one of the angels of God, that he looksdown from there at you and sees you, and rejoices at your tears, andpoints at them to the Lord God; and a long while yet will you keep thatgreat mother’s grief. But it will turn in the end into quiet joy, and yourbitter tears will be only tears of tender sorrow that purifies the heartand delivers it from sin. And I shall pray for the peace of your child’ssoul. What was his name?”
“Alexey, Father.”
“A sweet name. After Alexey, the man of God?”
“Yes, Father.”
“What a saint he was! I will remember him, mother, and your grief in myprayers, and I will pray for your husband’s health. It is a sin for you toleave him. Your little one will see from heaven that you have forsaken hisfather, and will weep over you. Why do you trouble his happiness? He isliving, for the soul lives for ever, and though he is not in the house heis near you, unseen. How can he go into the house when you say that thehouse is hateful to you? To whom is he to go if he find you not together,his father and mother? He comes to you in dreams now, and you grieve. Butthen he will send you gentle dreams. Go to your husband, mother; go thisvery day.”
“I will go, Father, at your word. I will go. You’ve gone straight to myheart. My Nikita, my Nikita, you are waiting for me,” the woman began in asing‐song voice; but the elder had already turned away to a very oldwoman, dressed like a dweller in the town, not like a pilgrim. Her eyesshowed that she had come with an object, and in order to say something.She said she was the widow of a non‐commissioned officer, and lived closeby in the town. Her son Vasenka was in the commissariat service, and hadgone to Irkutsk in Siberia. He had written twice from there, but now ayear had passed since he had written. She did inquire about him, but shedid not know the proper place to inquire.
“Only the other day Stepanida Ilyinishna—she’s a rich merchant’s wife—saidto me, ‘You go, Prohorovna, and put your son’s name down for prayer in thechurch, and pray for the peace of his soul as though he were dead. Hissoul will be troubled,’ she said, ‘and he will write you a letter.’ AndStepanida Ilyinishna told me it was a certain thing which had been manytimes tried. Only I am in doubt.... Oh, you light of ours! is it true orfalse, and would it be right?”
“Don’t think of it. It’s shameful to ask the question. How is it possibleto pray for the peace of a living soul? And his own mother too! It’s agreat sin, akin to sorcery. Only for your ignorance it is forgiven you.Better pray to the Queen of Heaven, our swift defense and help, for hisgood health, and that she may forgive you for your error. And anotherthing I will tell you, Prohorovna. Either he will soon come back to you,your son, or he will be sure to send a letter. Go, and henceforward be inpeace. Your son is alive, I tell you.”
“Dear Father, God reward you, our benefactor, who prays for all of us andfor our sins!”
But the elder had already noticed in the crowd two glowing eyes fixed uponhim. An exhausted, consumptive‐looking, though young peasant woman wasgazing at him in silence. Her eyes besought him, but she seemed afraid toapproach.
“What is it, my child?”
“Absolve my soul, Father,” she articulated softly, and slowly sank on herknees and bowed down at his feet. “I have sinned, Father. I am afraid ofmy sin.”
The elder sat down on the lower step. The woman crept closer to him, stillon her knees.
“I am a widow these three years,” she began in a half‐whisper, with a sortof shudder. “I had a hard life with my husband. He was an old man. He usedto beat me cruelly. He lay ill; I thought looking at him, if he were toget well, if he were to get up again, what then? And then the thought cameto me—”
“Stay!” said the elder, and he put his ear close to her lips.
The woman went on in a low whisper, so that it was almost impossible tocatch anything. She had soon done.
“Three years ago?” asked the elder.
“Three years. At first I didn’t think about it, but now I’ve begun to beill, and the thought never leaves me.”
“Have you come from far?”
“Over three hundred miles away.”
“Have you told it in confession?”
“I have confessed it. Twice I have confessed it.”
“Have you been admitted to Communion?”
“Yes. I am afraid. I am afraid to die.”
“Fear nothing and never be afraid; and don’t fret. If only your penitencefail not, God will forgive all. There is no sin, and there can be no sinon all the earth, which the Lord will not forgive to the truly repentant!Man cannot commit a sin so great as to exhaust the infinite love of God.Can there be a sin which could exceed the love of God? Think only ofrepentance, continual repentance, but dismiss fear altogether. Believethat God loves you as you cannot conceive; that He loves you with yoursin, in your sin. It has been said of old that over one repentant sinnerthere is more joy in heaven than over ten righteous men. Go, and fear not.Be not bitter against men. Be not angry if you are wronged. Forgive thedead man in your heart what wrong he did you. Be reconciled with him intruth. If you are penitent, you love. And if you love you are of God. Allthings are atoned for, all things are saved by love. If I, a sinner, evenas you are, am tender with you and have pity on you, how much more willGod. Love is such a priceless treasure that you can redeem the whole worldby it, and expiate not only your own sins but the sins of others.”
He signed her three times with the cross, took from his own neck a littleikon and put it upon her. She bowed down to the earth without speaking.
He got up and looked cheerfully at a healthy peasant woman with a tinybaby in her arms.
“From Vyshegorye, dear Father.”
“Five miles you have dragged yourself with the baby. What do you want?”
“I’ve come to look at you. I have been to you before—or have youforgotten? You’ve no great memory if you’ve forgotten me. They told us youwere ill. Thinks I, I’ll go and see him for myself. Now I see you, andyou’re not ill! You’ll live another twenty years. God bless you! There areplenty to pray for you; how should you be ill?”
“I thank you for all, daughter.”
“By the way, I have a thing to ask, not a great one. Here are sixtycopecks. Give them, dear Father, to some one poorer than me. I thought asI came along, better give through him. He’ll know whom to give to.”
“Thanks, my dear, thanks! You are a good woman. I love you. I will do socertainly. Is that your little girl?”
“My little girl, Father, Lizaveta.”
“May the Lord bless you both, you and your babe Lizaveta! You havegladdened my heart, mother. Farewell, dear children, farewell, dear ones.”
He blessed them all and bowed low to them.


Chapter IV. A Lady Of Little Faith

A visitor looking on the scene of his conversation with the peasants andhis blessing them shed silent tears and wiped them away with herhandkerchief. She was a sentimental society lady of genuinely gooddisposition in many respects. When the elder went up to her at last shemet him enthusiastically.
“Ah, what I have been feeling, looking on at this touching scene!...” Shecould not go on for emotion. “Oh, I understand the people’s love for you.I love the people myself. I want to love them. And who could help lovingthem, our splendid Russian people, so simple in their greatness!”
“How is your daughter’s health? You wanted to talk to me again?”
“Oh, I have been urgently begging for it, I have prayed for it! I wasready to fall on my knees and kneel for three days at your windows untilyou let me in. We have come, great healer, to express our ardentgratitude. You have healed my Lise, healed her completely, merely bypraying over her last Thursday and laying your hands upon her. We havehastened here to kiss those hands, to pour out our feelings and ourhomage.”
“What do you mean by healed? But she is still lying down in her chair.”
“But her night fevers have entirely ceased ever since Thursday,” said thelady with nervous haste. “And that’s not all. Her legs are stronger. Thismorning she got up well; she had slept all night. Look at her rosy cheeks,her bright eyes! She used to be always crying, but now she laughs and isgay and happy. This morning she insisted on my letting her stand up, andshe stood up for a whole minute without any support. She wagers that in afortnight she’ll be dancing a quadrille. I’ve called in DoctorHerzenstube. He shrugged his shoulders and said, ‘I am amazed; I can makenothing of it.’ And would you have us not come here to disturb you, notfly here to thank you? Lise, thank him—thank him!”
Lise’s pretty little laughing face became suddenly serious. She rose inher chair as far as she could and, looking at the elder, clasped her handsbefore him, but could not restrain herself and broke into laughter.
“It’s at him,” she said, pointing to Alyosha, with childish vexation atherself for not being able to repress her mirth.
If any one had looked at Alyosha standing a step behind the elder, hewould have caught a quick flush crimsoning his cheeks in an instant. Hiseyes shone and he looked down.
“She has a message for you, Alexey Fyodorovitch. How are you?” the motherwent on, holding out her exquisitely gloved hand to Alyosha.
The elder turned round and all at once looked attentively at Alyosha. Thelatter went nearer to Lise and, smiling in a strangely awkward way, heldout his hand to her too. Lise assumed an important air.
“Katerina Ivanovna has sent you this through me.” She handed him a littlenote. “She particularly begs you to go and see her as soon as possible;that you will not fail her, but will be sure to come.”
“She asks me to go and see her? Me? What for?” Alyosha muttered in greatastonishment. His face at once looked anxious. “Oh, it’s all to do withDmitri Fyodorovitch and—what has happened lately,” the mother explainedhurriedly. “Katerina Ivanovna has made up her mind, but she must see youabout it.... Why, of course, I can’t say. But she wants to see you atonce. And you will go to her, of course. It is a Christian duty.”
“I have only seen her once,” Alyosha protested with the same perplexity.
“Oh, she is such a lofty, incomparable creature! If only for hersuffering.... Think what she has gone through, what she is enduring now!Think what awaits her! It’s all terrible, terrible!”
“Very well, I will come,” Alyosha decided, after rapidly scanning thebrief, enigmatic note, which consisted of an urgent entreaty that he wouldcome, without any sort of explanation.
“Oh, how sweet and generous that would be of you!” cried Lise with suddenanimation. “I told mamma you’d be sure not to go. I said you were savingyour soul. How splendid you are! I’ve always thought you were splendid.How glad I am to tell you so!”
“Lise!” said her mother impressively, though she smiled after she had saidit.
“You have quite forgotten us, Alexey Fyodorovitch,” she said; “you nevercome to see us. Yet Lise has told me twice that she is never happy exceptwith you.”
Alyosha raised his downcast eyes and again flushed, and again smiledwithout knowing why. But the elder was no longer watching him. He hadbegun talking to a monk who, as mentioned before, had been awaiting hisentrance by Lise’s chair. He was evidently a monk of the humblest, that isof the peasant, class, of a narrow outlook, but a true believer, and, inhis own way, a stubborn one. He announced that he had come from the farnorth, from Obdorsk, from Saint Sylvester, and was a member of a poormonastery, consisting of only ten monks. The elder gave him his blessingand invited him to come to his cell whenever he liked.
“How can you presume to do such deeds?” the monk asked suddenly, pointingsolemnly and significantly at Lise. He was referring to her “healing.”
“It’s too early, of course, to speak of that. Relief is not complete cure,and may proceed from different causes. But if there has been any healing,it is by no power but God’s will. It’s all from God. Visit me, Father,” headded to the monk. “It’s not often I can see visitors. I am ill, and Iknow that my days are numbered.”
“Oh, no, no! God will not take you from us. You will live a long, longtime yet,” cried the lady. “And in what way are you ill? You look so well,so gay and happy.”
“I am extraordinarily better to‐day. But I know that it’s only for amoment. I understand my disease now thoroughly. If I seem so happy to you,you could never say anything that would please me so much. For men aremade for happiness, and any one who is completely happy has a right to sayto himself, ‘I am doing God’s will on earth.’ All the righteous, all thesaints, all the holy martyrs were happy.”
“Oh, how you speak! What bold and lofty words!” cried the lady. “You seemto pierce with your words. And yet—happiness, happiness—where is it? Whocan say of himself that he is happy? Oh, since you have been so good as tolet us see you once more to‐day, let me tell you what I could not utterlast time, what I dared not say, all I am suffering and have been for solong! I am suffering! Forgive me! I am suffering!”
And in a rush of fervent feeling she clasped her hands before him.
“From what specially?”
“I suffer ... from lack of faith.”
“Lack of faith in God?”
“Oh, no, no! I dare not even think of that. But the future life—it is suchan enigma! And no one, no one can solve it. Listen! You are a healer, youare deeply versed in the human soul, and of course I dare not expect youto believe me entirely, but I assure you on my word of honor that I am notspeaking lightly now. The thought of the life beyond the grave distractsme to anguish, to terror. And I don’t know to whom to appeal, and have notdared to all my life. And now I am so bold as to ask you. Oh, God! Whatwill you think of me now?”
She clasped her hands.
“Don’t distress yourself about my opinion of you,” said the elder. “Iquite believe in the sincerity of your suffering.”
“Oh, how thankful I am to you! You see, I shut my eyes and ask myself ifevery one has faith, where did it come from? And then they do say that itall comes from terror at the menacing phenomena of nature, and that noneof it’s real. And I say to myself, ‘What if I’ve been believing all mylife, and when I come to die there’s nothing but the burdocks growing onmy grave?’ as I read in some author. It’s awful! How—how can I get back myfaith? But I only believed when I was a little child, mechanically,without thinking of anything. How, how is one to prove it? I have come nowto lay my soul before you and to ask you about it. If I let this chanceslip, no one all my life will answer me. How can I prove it? How can Iconvince myself? Oh, how unhappy I am! I stand and look about me and seethat scarcely any one else cares; no one troubles his head about it, andI’m the only one who can’t stand it. It’s deadly—deadly!”
“No doubt. But there’s no proving it, though you can be convinced of it.”
“How?”
“By the experience of active love. Strive to love your neighbor activelyand indefatigably. In as far as you advance in love you will grow surer ofthe reality of God and of the immortality of your soul. If you attain toperfect self‐forgetfulness in the love of your neighbor, then you willbelieve without doubt, and no doubt can possibly enter your soul. This hasbeen tried. This is certain.”
“In active love? There’s another question—and such a question! You see, Iso love humanity that—would you believe it?—I often dream of forsaking allthat I have, leaving Lise, and becoming a sister of mercy. I close my eyesand think and dream, and at that moment I feel full of strength toovercome all obstacles. No wounds, no festering sores could at that momentfrighten me. I would bind them up and wash them with my own hands. I wouldnurse the afflicted. I would be ready to kiss such wounds.”
“It is much, and well that your mind is full of such dreams and notothers. Sometime, unawares, you may do a good deed in reality.”
“Yes. But could I endure such a life for long?” the lady went onfervently, almost frantically. “That’s the chief question—that’s my mostagonizing question. I shut my eyes and ask myself, ‘Would you perseverelong on that path? And if the patient whose wounds you are washing did notmeet you with gratitude, but worried you with his whims, without valuingor remarking your charitable services, began abusing you and rudelycommanding you, and complaining to the superior authorities of you (whichoften happens when people are in great suffering)—what then? Would youpersevere in your love, or not?’ And do you know, I came with horror tothe conclusion that, if anything could dissipate my love to humanity, itwould be ingratitude. In short, I am a hired servant, I expect my paymentat once—that is, praise, and the repayment of love with love. Otherwise Iam incapable of loving any one.”
She was in a very paroxysm of self‐castigation, and, concluding, shelooked with defiant resolution at the elder.
“It’s just the same story as a doctor once told me,” observed the elder.“He was a man getting on in years, and undoubtedly clever. He spoke asfrankly as you, though in jest, in bitter jest. ‘I love humanity,’ hesaid, ‘but I wonder at myself. The more I love humanity in general, theless I love man in particular. In my dreams,’ he said, ‘I have often cometo making enthusiastic schemes for the service of humanity, and perhaps Imight actually have faced crucifixion if it had been suddenly necessary;and yet I am incapable of living in the same room with any one for twodays together, as I know by experience. As soon as any one is near me, hispersonality disturbs my self‐complacency and restricts my freedom. Intwenty‐four hours I begin to hate the best of men: one because he’s toolong over his dinner; another because he has a cold and keeps on blowinghis nose. I become hostile to people the moment they come close to me. Butit has always happened that the more I detest men individually the moreardent becomes my love for humanity.’ ”
“But what’s to be done? What can one do in such a case? Must one despair?”
“No. It is enough that you are distressed at it. Do what you can, and itwill be reckoned unto you. Much is done already in you since you can sodeeply and sincerely know yourself. If you have been talking to me sosincerely, simply to gain approbation for your frankness, as you did fromme just now, then of course you will not attain to anything in theachievement of real love; it will all get no further than dreams, and yourwhole life will slip away like a phantom. In that case you will naturallycease to think of the future life too, and will of yourself grow calmerafter a fashion in the end.”
“You have crushed me! Only now, as you speak, I understand that I wasreally only seeking your approbation for my sincerity when I told you Icould not endure ingratitude. You have revealed me to myself. You haveseen through me and explained me to myself!”
“Are you speaking the truth? Well, now, after such a confession, I believethat you are sincere and good at heart. If you do not attain happiness,always remember that you are on the right road, and try not to leave it.Above all, avoid falsehood, every kind of falsehood, especially falsenessto yourself. Watch over your own deceitfulness and look into it everyhour, every minute. Avoid being scornful, both to others and to yourself.What seems to you bad within you will grow purer from the very fact ofyour observing it in yourself. Avoid fear, too, though fear is only theconsequence of every sort of falsehood. Never be frightened at your ownfaint‐heartedness in attaining love. Don’t be frightened overmuch even atyour evil actions. I am sorry I can say nothing more consoling to you, forlove in action is a harsh and dreadful thing compared with love in dreams.Love in dreams is greedy for immediate action, rapidly performed and inthe sight of all. Men will even give their lives if only the ordeal doesnot last long but is soon over, with all looking on and applauding asthough on the stage. But active love is labor and fortitude, and for somepeople too, perhaps, a complete science. But I predict that just when yousee with horror that in spite of all your efforts you are getting fartherfrom your goal instead of nearer to it—at that very moment I predict thatyou will reach it and behold clearly the miraculous power of the Lord whohas been all the time loving and mysteriously guiding you. Forgive me fornot being able to stay longer with you. They are waiting for me. Good‐by.”
The lady was weeping.
“Lise, Lise! Bless her—bless her!” she cried, starting up suddenly.
“She does not deserve to be loved. I have seen her naughtiness all along,”the elder said jestingly. “Why have you been laughing at Alexey?”
Lise had in fact been occupied in mocking at him all the time. She hadnoticed before that Alyosha was shy and tried not to look at her, and shefound this extremely amusing. She waited intently to catch his eye.Alyosha, unable to endure her persistent stare, was irresistibly andsuddenly drawn to glance at her, and at once she smiled triumphantly inhis face. Alyosha was even more disconcerted and vexed. At last he turnedaway from her altogether and hid behind the elder’s back. After a fewminutes, drawn by the same irresistible force, he turned again to seewhether he was being looked at or not, and found Lise almost hanging outof her chair to peep sideways at him, eagerly waiting for him to look.Catching his eye, she laughed so that the elder could not help saying,“Why do you make fun of him like that, naughty girl?”
Lise suddenly and quite unexpectedly blushed. Her eyes flashed and herface became quite serious. She began speaking quickly and nervously in awarm and resentful voice:
“Why has he forgotten everything, then? He used to carry me about when Iwas little. We used to play together. He used to come to teach me to read,do you know. Two years ago, when he went away, he said that he would neverforget me, that we were friends for ever, for ever, for ever! And now he’safraid of me all at once. Am I going to eat him? Why doesn’t he want tocome near me? Why doesn’t he talk? Why won’t he come and see us? It’s notthat you won’t let him. We know that he goes everywhere. It’s not goodmanners for me to invite him. He ought to have thought of it first, if hehasn’t forgotten me. No, now he’s saving his soul! Why have you put thatlong gown on him? If he runs he’ll fall.”
And suddenly she hid her face in her hand and went off into irresistible,prolonged, nervous, inaudible laughter. The elder listened to her with asmile, and blessed her tenderly. As she kissed his hand she suddenlypressed it to her eyes and began crying.
“Don’t be angry with me. I’m silly and good for nothing ... and perhapsAlyosha’s right, quite right, in not wanting to come and see such aridiculous girl.”
“I will certainly send him,” said the elder.


Chapter V. So Be It! So Be It!

The elder’s absence from his cell had lasted for about twenty‐fiveminutes. It was more than half‐past twelve, but Dmitri, on whose accountthey had all met there, had still not appeared. But he seemed almost to beforgotten, and when the elder entered the cell again, he found his guestsengaged in eager conversation. Ivan and the two monks took the leadingshare in it. Miüsov, too, was trying to take a part, and apparently veryeagerly, in the conversation. But he was unsuccessful in this also. He wasevidently in the background, and his remarks were treated with neglect,which increased his irritability. He had had intellectual encounters withIvan before and he could not endure a certain carelessness Ivan showedhim.
“Hitherto at least I have stood in the front ranks of all that isprogressive in Europe, and here the new generation positively ignores us,”he thought.
Fyodor Pavlovitch, who had given his word to sit still and be quiet, hadactually been quiet for some time, but he watched his neighbor Miüsov withan ironical little smile, obviously enjoying his discomfiture. He had beenwaiting for some time to pay off old scores, and now he could not let theopportunity slip. Bending over his shoulder he began teasing him again ina whisper.
“Why didn’t you go away just now, after the ‘courteously kissing’? Why didyou consent to remain in such unseemly company? It was because you feltinsulted and aggrieved, and you remained to vindicate yourself by showingoff your intelligence. Now you won’t go till you’ve displayed yourintellect to them.”
“You again?... On the contrary, I’m just going.”
“You’ll be the last, the last of all to go!” Fyodor Pavlovitch deliveredhim another thrust, almost at the moment of Father Zossima’s return.
The discussion died down for a moment, but the elder, seating himself inhis former place, looked at them all as though cordially inviting them togo on. Alyosha, who knew every expression of his face, saw that he wasfearfully exhausted and making a great effort. Of late he had been liableto fainting fits from exhaustion. His face had the pallor that was commonbefore such attacks, and his lips were white. But he evidently did notwant to break up the party. He seemed to have some special object of hisown in keeping them. What object? Alyosha watched him intently.
“We are discussing this gentleman’s most interesting article,” said FatherIosif, the librarian, addressing the elder, and indicating Ivan. “Hebrings forward much that is new, but I think the argument cuts both ways.It is an article written in answer to a book by an ecclesiasticalauthority on the question of the ecclesiastical court, and the scope ofits jurisdiction.”
“I’m sorry I have not read your article, but I’ve heard of it,” said theelder, looking keenly and intently at Ivan.
“He takes up a most interesting position,” continued the Father Librarian.“As far as Church jurisdiction is concerned he is apparently quite opposedto the separation of Church from State.”
“That’s interesting. But in what sense?” Father Zossima asked Ivan.
The latter, at last, answered him, not condescendingly, as Alyosha hadfeared, but with modesty and reserve, with evident goodwill and apparentlywithout the slightest _arrière‐pensée_.
“I start from the position that this confusion of elements, that is, ofthe essential principles of Church and State, will, of course, go on forever, in spite of the fact that it is impossible for them to mingle, andthat the confusion of these elements cannot lead to any consistent or evennormal results, for there is falsity at the very foundation of it.Compromise between the Church and State in such questions as, forinstance, jurisdiction, is, to my thinking, impossible in any real sense.My clerical opponent maintains that the Church holds a precise and definedposition in the State. I maintain, on the contrary, that the Church oughtto include the whole State, and not simply to occupy a corner in it, and,if this is, for some reason, impossible at present, then it ought, inreality, to be set up as the direct and chief aim of the futuredevelopment of Christian society!”
“Perfectly true,” Father Païssy, the silent and learned monk, assentedwith fervor and decision.
“The purest Ultramontanism!” cried Miüsov impatiently, crossing andrecrossing his legs.
“Oh, well, we have no mountains,” cried Father Iosif, and turning to theelder he continued: “Observe the answer he makes to the following‘fundamental and essential’ propositions of his opponent, who is, you mustnote, an ecclesiastic. First, that ‘no social organization can or ought toarrogate to itself power to dispose of the civic and political rights ofits members.’ Secondly, that ‘criminal and civil jurisdiction ought not tobelong to the Church, and is inconsistent with its nature, both as adivine institution and as an organization of men for religious objects,’and, finally, in the third place, ‘the Church is a kingdom not of thisworld.’ ”
“A most unworthy play upon words for an ecclesiastic!” Father Païssy couldnot refrain from breaking in again. “I have read the book which you haveanswered,” he added, addressing Ivan, “and was astounded at the words ‘theChurch is a kingdom not of this world.’ If it is not of this world, thenit cannot exist on earth at all. In the Gospel, the words ‘not of thisworld’ are not used in that sense. To play with such words isindefensible. Our Lord Jesus Christ came to set up the Church upon earth.The Kingdom of Heaven, of course, is not of this world, but in Heaven; butit is only entered through the Church which has been founded andestablished upon earth. And so a frivolous play upon words in such aconnection is unpardonable and improper. The Church is, in truth, akingdom and ordained to rule, and in the end must undoubtedly become thekingdom ruling over all the earth. For that we have the divine promise.”
He ceased speaking suddenly, as though checking himself. After listeningattentively and respectfully Ivan went on, addressing the elder withperfect composure and as before with ready cordiality:
“The whole point of my article lies in the fact that during the firstthree centuries Christianity only existed on earth in the Church and wasnothing but the Church. When the pagan Roman Empire desired to becomeChristian, it inevitably happened that, by becoming Christian, it includedthe Church but remained a pagan State in very many of its departments. Inreality this was bound to happen. But Rome as a State retained too much ofthe pagan civilization and culture, as, for example, in the very objectsand fundamental principles of the State. The Christian Church enteringinto the State could, of course, surrender no part of its fundamentalprinciples—the rock on which it stands—and could pursue no other aims thanthose which have been ordained and revealed by God Himself, and among themthat of drawing the whole world, and therefore the ancient pagan Stateitself, into the Church. In that way (that is, with a view to the future)it is not the Church that should seek a definite position in the State,like ‘every social organization,’ or as ‘an organization of men forreligious purposes’ (as my opponent calls the Church), but, on thecontrary, every earthly State should be, in the end, completelytransformed into the Church and should become nothing else but a Church,rejecting every purpose incongruous with the aims of the Church. All thiswill not degrade it in any way or take from its honor and glory as a greatState, nor from the glory of its rulers, but only turns it from a false,still pagan, and mistaken path to the true and rightful path, which aloneleads to the eternal goal. This is why the author of the book _On theFoundations of Church Jurisdiction_ would have judged correctly if, inseeking and laying down those foundations, he had looked upon them as atemporary compromise inevitable in our sinful and imperfect days. But assoon as the author ventures to declare that the foundations which hepredicates now, part of which Father Iosif just enumerated, are thepermanent, essential, and eternal foundations, he is going directlyagainst the Church and its sacred and eternal vocation. That is the gistof my article.”
“That is, in brief,” Father Païssy began again, laying stress on eachword, “according to certain theories only too clearly formulated in thenineteenth century, the Church ought to be transformed into the State, asthough this would be an advance from a lower to a higher form, so as todisappear into it, making way for science, for the spirit of the age, andcivilization. And if the Church resists and is unwilling, some corner willbe set apart for her in the State, and even that under control—and thiswill be so everywhere in all modern European countries. But Russian hopesand conceptions demand not that the Church should pass as from a lowerinto a higher type into the State, but, on the contrary, that the Stateshould end by being worthy to become only the Church and nothing else. Sobe it! So be it!”
“Well, I confess you’ve reassured me somewhat,” Miüsov said smiling, againcrossing his legs. “So far as I understand, then, the realization of suchan ideal is infinitely remote, at the second coming of Christ. That’s asyou please. It’s a beautiful Utopian dream of the abolition of war,diplomacy, banks, and so on—something after the fashion of socialism,indeed. But I imagined that it was all meant seriously, and that theChurch might be _now_ going to try criminals, and sentence them tobeating, prison, and even death.”
“But if there were none but the ecclesiastical court, the Church would noteven now sentence a criminal to prison or to death. Crime and the way ofregarding it would inevitably change, not all at once of course, butfairly soon,” Ivan replied calmly, without flinching.
“Are you serious?” Miüsov glanced keenly at him.
“If everything became the Church, the Church would exclude all thecriminal and disobedient, and would not cut off their heads,” Ivan wenton. “I ask you, what would become of the excluded? He would be cut offthen not only from men, as now, but from Christ. By his crime he wouldhave transgressed not only against men but against the Church of Christ.This is so even now, of course, strictly speaking, but it is not clearlyenunciated, and very, very often the criminal of to‐day compromises withhis conscience: ‘I steal,’ he says, ‘but I don’t go against the Church.I’m not an enemy of Christ.’ That’s what the criminal of to‐day iscontinually saying to himself, but when the Church takes the place of theState it will be difficult for him, in opposition to the Church all overthe world, to say: ‘All men are mistaken, all in error, all mankind arethe false Church. I, a thief and murderer, am the only true ChristianChurch.’ It will be very difficult to say this to himself; it requires arare combination of unusual circumstances. Now, on the other side, takethe Church’s own view of crime: is it not bound to renounce the presentalmost pagan attitude, and to change from a mechanical cutting off of itstainted member for the preservation of society, as at present, intocompletely and honestly adopting the idea of the regeneration of the man,of his reformation and salvation?”
“What do you mean? I fail to understand again,” Miüsov interrupted. “Somesort of dream again. Something shapeless and even incomprehensible. Whatis excommunication? What sort of exclusion? I suspect you are simplyamusing yourself, Ivan Fyodorovitch.”
“Yes, but you know, in reality it is so now,” said the elder suddenly, andall turned to him at once. “If it were not for the Church of Christ therewould be nothing to restrain the criminal from evil‐doing, no realchastisement for it afterwards; none, that is, but the mechanicalpunishment spoken of just now, which in the majority of cases onlyembitters the heart; and not the real punishment, the only effectual one,the only deterrent and softening one, which lies in the recognition of sinby conscience.”
“How is that, may one inquire?” asked Miüsov, with lively curiosity.
“Why,” began the elder, “all these sentences to exile with hard labor, andformerly with flogging also, reform no one, and what’s more, deter hardlya single criminal, and the number of crimes does not diminish but iscontinually on the increase. You must admit that. Consequently thesecurity of society is not preserved, for, although the obnoxious memberis mechanically cut off and sent far away out of sight, another criminalalways comes to take his place at once, and often two of them. If anythingdoes preserve society, even in our time, and does regenerate and transformthe criminal, it is only the law of Christ speaking in his conscience. Itis only by recognizing his wrong‐doing as a son of a Christiansociety—that is, of the Church—that he recognizes his sin againstsociety—that is, against the Church. So that it is only against theChurch, and not against the State, that the criminal of to‐day canrecognize that he has sinned. If society, as a Church, had jurisdiction,then it would know when to bring back from exclusion and to reunite toitself. Now the Church having no real jurisdiction, but only the power ofmoral condemnation, withdraws of her own accord from punishing thecriminal actively. She does not excommunicate him but simply persists inmotherly exhortation of him. What is more, the Church even tries topreserve all Christian communion with the criminal. She admits him tochurch services, to the holy sacrament, gives him alms, and treats himmore as a captive than as a convict. And what would become of thecriminal, O Lord, if even the Christian society—that is, the Church—wereto reject him even as the civil law rejects him and cuts him off? Whatwould become of him if the Church punished him with her excommunication asthe direct consequence of the secular law? There could be no more terribledespair, at least for a Russian criminal, for Russian criminals still havefaith. Though, who knows, perhaps then a fearful thing would happen,perhaps the despairing heart of the criminal would lose its faith and thenwhat would become of him? But the Church, like a tender, loving mother,holds aloof from active punishment herself, as the sinner is too severelypunished already by the civil law, and there must be at least some one tohave pity on him. The Church holds aloof, above all, because its judgmentis the only one that contains the truth, and therefore cannot practicallyand morally be united to any other judgment even as a temporarycompromise. She can enter into no compact about that. The foreigncriminal, they say, rarely repents, for the very doctrines of to‐dayconfirm him in the idea that his crime is not a crime, but only a reactionagainst an unjustly oppressive force. Society cuts him off completely by aforce that triumphs over him mechanically and (so at least they say ofthemselves in Europe) accompanies this exclusion with hatred,forgetfulness, and the most profound indifference as to the ultimate fateof the erring brother. In this way, it all takes place without thecompassionate intervention of the Church, for in many cases there are nochurches there at all, for though ecclesiastics and splendid churchbuildings remain, the churches themselves have long ago striven to passfrom Church into State and to disappear in it completely. So it seems atleast in Lutheran countries. As for Rome, it was proclaimed a Stateinstead of a Church a thousand years ago. And so the criminal is no longerconscious of being a member of the Church and sinks into despair. If hereturns to society, often it is with such hatred that society itselfinstinctively cuts him off. You can judge for yourself how it must end. Inmany cases it would seem to be the same with us, but the difference isthat besides the established law courts we have the Church too, whichalways keeps up relations with the criminal as a dear and still preciousson. And besides that, there is still preserved, though only in thought,the judgment of the Church, which though no longer existing in practice isstill living as a dream for the future, and is, no doubt, instinctivelyrecognized by the criminal in his soul. What was said here just now istrue too, that is, that if the jurisdiction of the Church were introducedin practice in its full force, that is, if the whole of the society werechanged into the Church, not only the judgment of the Church would haveinfluence on the reformation of the criminal such as it never has now, butpossibly also the crimes themselves would be incredibly diminished. Andthere can be no doubt that the Church would look upon the criminal and thecrime of the future in many cases quite differently and would succeed inrestoring the excluded, in restraining those who plan evil, and inregenerating the fallen. It is true,” said Father Zossima, with a smile,“the Christian society now is not ready and is only resting on some sevenrighteous men, but as they are never lacking, it will continue stillunshaken in expectation of its complete transformation from a societyalmost heathen in character into a single universal and all‐powerfulChurch. So be it, so be it! Even though at the end of the ages, for it isordained to come to pass! And there is no need to be troubled about timesand seasons, for the secret of the times and seasons is in the wisdom ofGod, in His foresight, and His love. And what in human reckoning seemsstill afar off, may by the Divine ordinance be close at hand, on the eveof its appearance. And so be it, so be it!”
“So be it, so be it!” Father Païssy repeated austerely and reverently.
“Strange, extremely strange!” Miüsov pronounced, not so much with heat aswith latent indignation.
“What strikes you as so strange?” Father Iosif inquired cautiously.
“Why, it’s beyond anything!” cried Miüsov, suddenly breaking out; “theState is eliminated and the Church is raised to the position of the State.It’s not simply Ultramontanism, it’s arch‐Ultramontanism! It’s beyond thedreams of Pope Gregory the Seventh!”
“You are completely misunderstanding it,” said Father Païssy sternly.“Understand, the Church is not to be transformed into the State. That isRome and its dream. That is the third temptation of the devil. On thecontrary, the State is transformed into the Church, will ascend and becomea Church over the whole world—which is the complete opposite ofUltramontanism and Rome, and your interpretation, and is only the gloriousdestiny ordained for the Orthodox Church. This star will arise in theeast!”
Miüsov was significantly silent. His whole figure expressed extraordinarypersonal dignity. A supercilious and condescending smile played on hislips. Alyosha watched it all with a throbbing heart. The wholeconversation stirred him profoundly. He glanced casually at Rakitin, whowas standing immovable in his place by the door listening and watchingintently though with downcast eyes. But from the color in his cheeksAlyosha guessed that Rakitin was probably no less excited, and he knewwhat caused his excitement.
“Allow me to tell you one little anecdote, gentlemen,” Miüsov saidimpressively, with a peculiarly majestic air. “Some years ago, soon afterthe _coup d’état_ of December, I happened to be calling in Paris on anextremely influential personage in the Government, and I met a veryinteresting man in his house. This individual was not precisely adetective but was a sort of superintendent of a whole regiment ofpolitical detectives—a rather powerful position in its own way. I wasprompted by curiosity to seize the opportunity of conversation with him.And as he had not come as a visitor but as a subordinate official bringinga special report, and as he saw the reception given me by his chief, hedeigned to speak with some openness, to a certain extent only, of course.He was rather courteous than open, as Frenchmen know how to be courteous,especially to a foreigner. But I thoroughly understood him. The subjectwas the socialist revolutionaries who were at that time persecuted. I willquote only one most curious remark dropped by this person. ‘We are notparticularly afraid,’ said he, ‘of all these socialists, anarchists,infidels, and revolutionists; we keep watch on them and know all theirgoings on. But there are a few peculiar men among them who believe in Godand are Christians, but at the same time are socialists. These are thepeople we are most afraid of. They are dreadful people! The socialist whois a Christian is more to be dreaded than a socialist who is an atheist.’The words struck me at the time, and now they have suddenly come back tome here, gentlemen.”
“You apply them to us, and look upon us as socialists?” Father Païssyasked directly, without beating about the bush.
But before Pyotr Alexandrovitch could think what to answer, the dooropened, and the guest so long expected, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, came in. Theyhad, in fact, given up expecting him, and his sudden appearance causedsome surprise for a moment.


Chapter VI. Why Is Such A Man Alive?

Dmitri Fyodorovitch, a young man of eight and twenty, of medium height andagreeable countenance, looked older than his years. He was muscular, andshowed signs of considerable physical strength. Yet there was somethingnot healthy in his face. It was rather thin, his cheeks were hollow, andthere was an unhealthy sallowness in their color. His rather large,prominent, dark eyes had an expression of firm determination, and yetthere was a vague look in them, too. Even when he was excited and talkingirritably, his eyes somehow did not follow his mood, but betrayedsomething else, sometimes quite incongruous with what was passing. “It’shard to tell what he’s thinking,” those who talked to him sometimesdeclared. People who saw something pensive and sullen in his eyes werestartled by his sudden laugh, which bore witness to mirthful and light‐hearted thoughts at the very time when his eyes were so gloomy. A certainstrained look in his face was easy to understand at this moment. Every oneknew, or had heard of, the extremely restless and dissipated life which hehad been leading of late, as well as of the violent anger to which he hadbeen roused in his quarrels with his father. There were several storiescurrent in the town about it. It is true that he was irascible by nature,“of an unstable and unbalanced mind,” as our justice of the peace,Katchalnikov, happily described him.
He was stylishly and irreproachably dressed in a carefully buttoned frock‐coat. He wore black gloves and carried a top‐hat. Having only lately leftthe army, he still had mustaches and no beard. His dark brown hair wascropped short, and combed forward on his temples. He had the long,determined stride of a military man. He stood still for a moment on thethreshold, and glancing at the whole party went straight up to the elder,guessing him to be their host. He made him a low bow, and asked hisblessing. Father Zossima, rising in his chair, blessed him. Dmitri kissedhis hand respectfully, and with intense feeling, almost anger, he said:
“Be so generous as to forgive me for having kept you waiting so long, butSmerdyakov, the valet sent me by my father, in reply to my inquiries, toldme twice over that the appointment was for one. Now I suddenly learn—”
“Don’t disturb yourself,” interposed the elder. “No matter. You are alittle late. It’s of no consequence....”
“I’m extremely obliged to you, and expected no less from your goodness.”
Saying this, Dmitri bowed once more. Then, turning suddenly towards hisfather, made him, too, a similarly low and respectful bow. He hadevidently considered it beforehand, and made this bow in all seriousness,thinking it his duty to show his respect and good intentions.
Although Fyodor Pavlovitch was taken unawares, he was equal to theoccasion. In response to Dmitri’s bow he jumped up from his chair and madehis son a bow as low in return. His face was suddenly solemn andimpressive, which gave him a positively malignant look. Dmitri bowedgenerally to all present, and without a word walked to the window with hislong, resolute stride, sat down on the only empty chair, near FatherPaïssy, and, bending forward, prepared to listen to the conversation hehad interrupted.
Dmitri’s entrance had taken no more than two minutes, and the conversationwas resumed. But this time Miüsov thought it unnecessary to reply toFather Païssy’s persistent and almost irritable question.
“Allow me to withdraw from this discussion,” he observed with a certainwell‐bred nonchalance. “It’s a subtle question, too. Here IvanFyodorovitch is smiling at us. He must have something interesting to sayabout that also. Ask him.”
“Nothing special, except one little remark,” Ivan replied at once.“European Liberals in general, and even our liberal dilettanti, often mixup the final results of socialism with those of Christianity. This wildnotion is, of course, a characteristic feature. But it’s not only Liberalsand dilettanti who mix up socialism and Christianity, but, in many cases,it appears, the police—the foreign police, of course—do the same. YourParis anecdote is rather to the point, Pyotr Alexandrovitch.”
“I ask your permission to drop this subject altogether,” Miüsov repeated.“I will tell you instead, gentlemen, another interesting and rathercharacteristic anecdote of Ivan Fyodorovitch himself. Only five days ago,in a gathering here, principally of ladies, he solemnly declared inargument that there was nothing in the whole world to make men love theirneighbors. That there was no law of nature that man should love mankind,and that, if there had been any love on earth hitherto, it was not owingto a natural law, but simply because men have believed in immortality.Ivan Fyodorovitch added in parenthesis that the whole natural law lies inthat faith, and that if you were to destroy in mankind the belief inimmortality, not only love but every living force maintaining the life ofthe world would at once be dried up. Moreover, nothing then would beimmoral, everything would be lawful, even cannibalism. That’s not all. Heended by asserting that for every individual, like ourselves, who does notbelieve in God or immortality, the moral law of nature must immediately bechanged into the exact contrary of the former religious law, and thategoism, even to crime, must become not only lawful but even recognized asthe inevitable, the most rational, even honorable outcome of his position.From this paradox, gentlemen, you can judge of the rest of our eccentricand paradoxical friend Ivan Fyodorovitch’s theories.”
“Excuse me,” Dmitri cried suddenly; “if I’ve heard aright, crime must notonly be permitted but even recognized as the inevitable and the mostrational outcome of his position for every infidel! Is that so or not?”
“Quite so,” said Father Païssy.
“I’ll remember it.”
Having uttered these words Dmitri ceased speaking as suddenly as he hadbegun. Every one looked at him with curiosity.
“Is that really your conviction as to the consequences of thedisappearance of the faith in immortality?” the elder asked Ivan suddenly.
“Yes. That was my contention. There is no virtue if there is noimmortality.”
“You are blessed in believing that, or else most unhappy.”
“Why unhappy?” Ivan asked smiling.
“Because, in all probability you don’t believe yourself in the immortalityof your soul, nor in what you have written yourself in your article onChurch jurisdiction.”
“Perhaps you are right! ... But I wasn’t altogether joking,” Ivan suddenlyand strangely confessed, flushing quickly.
“You were not altogether joking. That’s true. The question is stillfretting your heart, and not answered. But the martyr likes sometimes todivert himself with his despair, as it were driven to it by despairitself. Meanwhile, in your despair, you, too, divert yourself withmagazine articles, and discussions in society, though you don’t believeyour own arguments, and with an aching heart mock at them inwardly....That question you have not answered, and it is your great grief, for itclamors for an answer.”
“But can it be answered by me? Answered in the affirmative?” Ivan went onasking strangely, still looking at the elder with the same inexplicablesmile.
“If it can’t be decided in the affirmative, it will never be decided inthe negative. You know that that is the peculiarity of your heart, and allits suffering is due to it. But thank the Creator who has given you alofty heart capable of such suffering; of thinking and seeking higherthings, for our dwelling is in the heavens. God grant that your heart willattain the answer on earth, and may God bless your path.”
The elder raised his hand and would have made the sign of the cross overIvan from where he stood. But the latter rose from his seat, went up tohim, received his blessing, and kissing his hand went back to his place insilence. His face looked firm and earnest. This action and all thepreceding conversation, which was so surprising from Ivan, impressed everyone by its strangeness and a certain solemnity, so that all were silentfor a moment, and there was a look almost of apprehension in Alyosha’sface. But Miüsov suddenly shrugged his shoulders. And at the same momentFyodor Pavlovitch jumped up from his seat.
“Most pious and holy elder,” he cried, pointing to Ivan, “that is my son,flesh of my flesh, the dearest of my flesh! He is my most dutiful KarlMoor, so to speak, while this son who has just come in, Dmitri, againstwhom I am seeking justice from you, is the undutiful Franz Moor—they areboth out of Schiller’s _Robbers_, and so I am the reigning Count von Moor!Judge and save us! We need not only your prayers but your prophecies!”
“Speak without buffoonery, and don’t begin by insulting the members ofyour family,” answered the elder, in a faint, exhausted voice. He wasobviously getting more and more fatigued, and his strength was failing.
“An unseemly farce which I foresaw when I came here!” cried Dmitriindignantly. He too leapt up. “Forgive it, reverend Father,” he added,addressing the elder. “I am not a cultivated man, and I don’t even knowhow to address you properly, but you have been deceived and you have beentoo good‐natured in letting us meet here. All my father wants is ascandal. Why he wants it only he can tell. He always has some motive. ButI believe I know why—”
“They all blame me, all of them!” cried Fyodor Pavlovitch in his turn.“Pyotr Alexandrovitch here blames me too. You have been blaming me, PyotrAlexandrovitch, you have!” he turned suddenly to Miüsov, although thelatter was not dreaming of interrupting him. “They all accuse me of havinghidden the children’s money in my boots, and cheated them, but isn’t therea court of law? There they will reckon out for you, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,from your notes, your letters, and your agreements, how much money youhad, how much you have spent, and how much you have left. Why does PyotrAlexandrovitch refuse to pass judgment? Dmitri is not a stranger to him.Because they are all against me, while Dmitri Fyodorovitch is in debt tome, and not a little, but some thousands of which I have documentaryproof. The whole town is echoing with his debaucheries. And where he wasstationed before, he several times spent a thousand or two for theseduction of some respectable girl; we know all about that, DmitriFyodorovitch, in its most secret details. I’ll prove it.... Would youbelieve it, holy Father, he has captivated the heart of the most honorableof young ladies of good family and fortune, daughter of a gallant colonel,formerly his superior officer, who had received many honors and had theAnna Order on his breast. He compromised the girl by his promise ofmarriage, now she is an orphan and here; she is betrothed to him, yetbefore her very eyes he is dancing attendance on a certain enchantress.And although this enchantress has lived in, so to speak, civil marriagewith a respectable man, yet she is of an independent character, anunapproachable fortress for everybody, just like a legal wife—for she isvirtuous, yes, holy Fathers, she is virtuous. Dmitri Fyodorovitch wants toopen this fortress with a golden key, and that’s why he is insolent to menow, trying to get money from me, though he has wasted thousands on thisenchantress already. He’s continually borrowing money for the purpose.From whom do you think? Shall I say, Mitya?”
“Be silent!” cried Dmitri, “wait till I’m gone. Don’t dare in my presenceto asperse the good name of an honorable girl! That you should utter aword about her is an outrage, and I won’t permit it!”
He was breathless.
“Mitya! Mitya!” cried Fyodor Pavlovitch hysterically, squeezing out atear. “And is your father’s blessing nothing to you? If I curse you, whatthen?”
“Shameless hypocrite!” exclaimed Dmitri furiously.
“He says that to his father! his father! What would he be with others?Gentlemen, only fancy; there’s a poor but honorable man living here,burdened with a numerous family, a captain who got into trouble and wasdischarged from the army, but not publicly, not by court‐martial, with noslur on his honor. And three weeks ago, Dmitri seized him by the beard ina tavern, dragged him out into the street and beat him publicly, and allbecause he is an agent in a little business of mine.”
“It’s all a lie! Outwardly it’s the truth, but inwardly a lie!” Dmitri wastrembling with rage. “Father, I don’t justify my action. Yes, I confess itpublicly, I behaved like a brute to that captain, and I regret it now, andI’m disgusted with myself for my brutal rage. But this captain, this agentof yours, went to that lady whom you call an enchantress, and suggested toher from you, that she should take I.O.U.’s of mine which were in yourpossession, and should sue me for the money so as to get me into prison bymeans of them, if I persisted in claiming an account from you of myproperty. Now you reproach me for having a weakness for that lady when youyourself incited her to captivate me! She told me so to my face.... Shetold me the story and laughed at you.... You wanted to put me in prisonbecause you are jealous of me with her, because you’d begun to force yourattentions upon her; and I know all about that, too; she laughed at youfor that as well—you hear—she laughed at you as she described it. So hereyou have this man, this father who reproaches his profligate son!Gentlemen, forgive my anger, but I foresaw that this crafty old man wouldonly bring you together to create a scandal. I had come to forgive him ifhe held out his hand; to forgive him, and ask forgiveness! But as he hasjust this minute insulted not only me, but an honorable young lady, forwhom I feel such reverence that I dare not take her name in vain, I havemade up my mind to show up his game, though he is my father....”
He could not go on. His eyes were glittering and he breathed withdifficulty. But every one in the cell was stirred. All except FatherZossima got up from their seats uneasily. The monks looked austere butwaited for guidance from the elder. He sat still, pale, not fromexcitement but from the weakness of disease. An imploring smile lighted uphis face; from time to time he raised his hand, as though to check thestorm, and, of course, a gesture from him would have been enough to endthe scene; but he seemed to be waiting for something and watched themintently as though trying to make out something which was not perfectlyclear to him. At last Miüsov felt completely humiliated and disgraced.
“We are all to blame for this scandalous scene,” he said hotly. “But I didnot foresee it when I came, though I knew with whom I had to deal. Thismust be stopped at once! Believe me, your reverence, I had no preciseknowledge of the details that have just come to light, I was unwilling tobelieve them, and I learn for the first time.... A father is jealous ofhis son’s relations with a woman of loose behavior and intrigues with thecreature to get his son into prison! This is the company in which I havebeen forced to be present! I was deceived. I declare to you all that I wasas much deceived as any one.”
“Dmitri Fyodorovitch,” yelled Fyodor Pavlovitch suddenly, in an unnaturalvoice, “if you were not my son I would challenge you this instant to aduel ... with pistols, at three paces ... across a handkerchief,” heended, stamping with both feet.
With old liars who have been acting all their lives there are moments whenthey enter so completely into their part that they tremble or shed tearsof emotion in earnest, although at that very moment, or a second later,they are able to whisper to themselves, “You know you are lying, youshameless old sinner! You’re acting now, in spite of your ‘holy’ wrath.”
Dmitri frowned painfully, and looked with unutterable contempt at hisfather.
“I thought ... I thought,” he said, in a soft and, as it were, controlledvoice, “that I was coming to my native place with the angel of my heart,my betrothed, to cherish his old age, and I find nothing but a depravedprofligate, a despicable clown!”
“A duel!” yelled the old wretch again, breathless and spluttering at eachsyllable. “And you, Pyotr Alexandrovitch Miüsov, let me tell you thatthere has never been in all your family a loftier, and more honest—youhear—more honest woman than this ‘creature,’ as you have dared to callher! And you, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, have abandoned your betrothed for that‘creature,’ so you must yourself have thought that your betrothed couldn’thold a candle to her. That’s the woman called a ‘creature’!”
“Shameful!” broke from Father Iosif.
“Shameful and disgraceful!” Kalganov, flushing crimson, cried in a boyishvoice, trembling with emotion. He had been silent till that moment.
“Why is such a man alive?” Dmitri, beside himself with rage, growled in ahollow voice, hunching up his shoulders till he looked almost deformed.“Tell me, can he be allowed to go on defiling the earth?” He looked roundat every one and pointed at the old man. He spoke evenly and deliberately.
“Listen, listen, monks, to the parricide!” cried Fyodor Pavlovitch,rushing up to Father Iosif. “That’s the answer to your ‘shameful!’ What isshameful? That ‘creature,’ that ‘woman of loose behavior’ is perhapsholier than you are yourselves, you monks who are seeking salvation! Shefell perhaps in her youth, ruined by her environment. But she loved much,and Christ himself forgave the woman ‘who loved much.’ ”
“It was not for such love Christ forgave her,” broke impatiently from thegentle Father Iosif.
“Yes, it was for such, monks, it was! You save your souls here, eatingcabbage, and think you are the righteous. You eat a gudgeon a day, and youthink you bribe God with gudgeon.”
“This is unendurable!” was heard on all sides in the cell.
But this unseemly scene was cut short in a most unexpected way. FatherZossima rose suddenly from his seat. Almost distracted with anxiety forthe elder and every one else, Alyosha succeeded, however, in supportinghim by the arm. Father Zossima moved towards Dmitri and reaching him sankon his knees before him. Alyosha thought that he had fallen from weakness,but this was not so. The elder distinctly and deliberately bowed down atDmitri’s feet till his forehead touched the floor. Alyosha was soastounded that he failed to assist him when he got up again. There was afaint smile on his lips.
“Good‐by! Forgive me, all of you!” he said, bowing on all sides to hisguests.
Dmitri stood for a few moments in amazement. Bowing down to him—what didit mean? Suddenly he cried aloud, “Oh, God!” hid his face in his hands,and rushed out of the room. All the guests flocked out after him, in theirconfusion not saying good‐by, or bowing to their host. Only the monks wentup to him again for a blessing.
“What did it mean, falling at his feet like that? Was it symbolic orwhat?” said Fyodor Pavlovitch, suddenly quieted and trying to reopenconversation without venturing to address anybody in particular. They wereall passing out of the precincts of the hermitage at the moment.
“I can’t answer for a madhouse and for madmen,” Miüsov answered at onceill‐humoredly, “but I will spare myself your company, Fyodor Pavlovitch,and, trust me, for ever. Where’s that monk?”
“That monk,” that is, the monk who had invited them to dine with theSuperior, did not keep them waiting. He met them as soon as they came downthe steps from the elder’s cell, as though he had been waiting for themall the time.
“Reverend Father, kindly do me a favor. Convey my deepest respect to theFather Superior, apologize for me, personally, Miüsov, to his reverence,telling him that I deeply regret that owing to unforeseen circumstances Iam unable to have the honor of being present at his table, greatly as Ishould desire to do so,” Miüsov said irritably to the monk.
“And that unforeseen circumstance, of course, is myself,” FyodorPavlovitch cut in immediately. “Do you hear, Father; this gentlemandoesn’t want to remain in my company or else he’d come at once. And youshall go, Pyotr Alexandrovitch, pray go to the Father Superior and goodappetite to you. I will decline, and not you. Home, home, I’ll eat athome, I don’t feel equal to it here, Pyotr Alexandrovitch, my amiablerelative.”
“I am not your relative and never have been, you contemptible man!”
“I said it on purpose to madden you, because you always disclaim therelationship, though you really are a relation in spite of your shuffling.I’ll prove it by the church calendar. As for you, Ivan, stay if you like.I’ll send the horses for you later. Propriety requires you to go to theFather Superior, Pyotr Alexandrovitch, to apologize for the disturbancewe’ve been making....”
“Is it true that you are going home? Aren’t you lying?”
“Pyotr Alexandrovitch! How could I dare after what’s happened! Forgive me,gentlemen, I was carried away! And upset besides! And, indeed, I amashamed. Gentlemen, one man has the heart of Alexander of Macedon andanother the heart of the little dog Fido. Mine is that of the little dogFido. I am ashamed! After such an escapade how can I go to dinner, togobble up the monastery’s sauces? I am ashamed, I can’t. You must excuseme!”
“The devil only knows, what if he deceives us?” thought Miüsov, stillhesitating, and watching the retreating buffoon with distrustful eyes. Thelatter turned round, and noticing that Miüsov was watching him, waved hima kiss.
“Well, are you coming to the Superior?” Miüsov asked Ivan abruptly.
“Why not? I was especially invited yesterday.”
“Unfortunately I feel myself compelled to go to this confounded dinner,”said Miüsov with the same irritability, regardless of the fact that themonk was listening. “We ought, at least, to apologize for the disturbance,and explain that it was not our doing. What do you think?”
“Yes, we must explain that it wasn’t our doing. Besides, father won’t bethere,” observed Ivan.
“Well, I should hope not! Confound this dinner!”
They all walked on, however. The monk listened in silence. On the roadthrough the copse he made one observation however—that the Father Superiorhad been waiting a long time, and that they were more than half an hourlate. He received no answer. Miüsov looked with hatred at Ivan.
“Here he is, going to the dinner as though nothing had happened,” hethought. “A brazen face, and the conscience of a Karamazov!”


Chapter VII. A Young Man Bent On A Career

Alyosha helped Father Zossima to his bedroom and seated him on his bed. Itwas a little room furnished with the bare necessities. There was a narrowiron bedstead, with a strip of felt for a mattress. In the corner, underthe ikons, was a reading‐desk with a cross and the Gospel lying on it. Theelder sank exhausted on the bed. His eyes glittered and he breathed hard.He looked intently at Alyosha, as though considering something.
“Go, my dear boy, go. Porfiry is enough for me. Make haste, you are neededthere, go and wait at the Father Superior’s table.”
“Let me stay here,” Alyosha entreated.
“You are more needed there. There is no peace there. You will wait, and beof service. If evil spirits rise up, repeat a prayer. And remember, myson”—the elder liked to call him that—“this is not the place for you inthe future. When it is God’s will to call me, leave the monastery. Go awayfor good.”
Alyosha started.
“What is it? This is not your place for the time. I bless you for greatservice in the world. Yours will be a long pilgrimage. And you will haveto take a wife, too. You will have to bear _all_ before you come back.There will be much to do. But I don’t doubt of you, and so I send youforth. Christ is with you. Do not abandon Him and He will not abandon you.You will see great sorrow, and in that sorrow you will be happy. This ismy last message to you: in sorrow seek happiness. Work, work unceasingly.Remember my words, for although I shall talk with you again, not only mydays but my hours are numbered.”
Alyosha’s face again betrayed strong emotion. The corners of his mouthquivered.
“What is it again?” Father Zossima asked, smiling gently. “The worldly mayfollow the dead with tears, but here we rejoice over the father who isdeparting. We rejoice and pray for him. Leave me, I must pray. Go, andmake haste. Be near your brothers. And not near one only, but near both.”
Father Zossima raised his hand to bless him. Alyosha could make noprotest, though he had a great longing to remain. He longed, moreover, toask the significance of his bowing to Dmitri, the question was on the tipof his tongue, but he dared not ask it. He knew that the elder would haveexplained it unasked if he had thought fit. But evidently it was not hiswill. That action had made a terrible impression on Alyosha; he believedblindly in its mysterious significance. Mysterious, and perhaps awful.
As he hastened out of the hermitage precincts to reach the monastery intime to serve at the Father Superior’s dinner, he felt a sudden pang athis heart, and stopped short. He seemed to hear again Father Zossima’swords, foretelling his approaching end. What he had foretold so exactlymust infallibly come to pass. Alyosha believed that implicitly. But howcould he be left without him? How could he live without seeing and hearinghim? Where should he go? He had told him not to weep, and to leave themonastery. Good God! It was long since Alyosha had known such anguish. Hehurried through the copse that divided the monastery from the hermitage,and unable to bear the burden of his thoughts, he gazed at the ancientpines beside the path. He had not far to go—about five hundred paces. Heexpected to meet no one at that hour, but at the first turn of the path henoticed Rakitin. He was waiting for some one.
“Are you waiting for me?” asked Alyosha, overtaking him.
“Yes,” grinned Rakitin. “You are hurrying to the Father Superior, I know;he has a banquet. There’s not been such a banquet since the Superiorentertained the Bishop and General Pahatov, do you remember? I shan’t bethere, but you go and hand the sauces. Tell me one thing, Alexey, whatdoes that vision mean? That’s what I want to ask you.”
“What vision?”
“That bowing to your brother, Dmitri. And didn’t he tap the ground withhis forehead, too!”
“You speak of Father Zossima?”
“Yes, of Father Zossima.”
“Tapped the ground?”
“Ah, an irreverent expression! Well, what of it? Anyway, what does thatvision mean?”
“I don’t know what it means, Misha.”
“I knew he wouldn’t explain it to you! There’s nothing wonderful about it,of course, only the usual holy mummery. But there was an object in theperformance. All the pious people in the town will talk about it andspread the story through the province, wondering what it meant. To mythinking the old man really has a keen nose; he sniffed a crime. Yourhouse stinks of it.”
“What crime?”
Rakitin evidently had something he was eager to speak of.
“It’ll be in your family, this crime. Between your brothers and your richold father. So Father Zossima flopped down to be ready for what may turnup. If something happens later on, it’ll be: ‘Ah, the holy man foresaw it,prophesied it!’ though it’s a poor sort of prophecy, flopping like that.‘Ah, but it was symbolic,’ they’ll say, ‘an allegory,’ and the devil knowswhat all! It’ll be remembered to his glory: ‘He predicted the crime andmarked the criminal!’ That’s always the way with these crazy fanatics;they cross themselves at the tavern and throw stones at the temple. Likeyour elder, he takes a stick to a just man and falls at the feet of amurderer.”
“What crime? What murderer? What do you mean?”
Alyosha stopped dead. Rakitin stopped, too.
“What murderer? As though you didn’t know! I’ll bet you’ve thought of itbefore. That’s interesting, too, by the way. Listen, Alyosha, you alwaysspeak the truth, though you’re always between two stools. Have you thoughtof it or not? Answer.”
“I have,” answered Alyosha in a low voice. Even Rakitin was taken aback.
“What? Have you really?” he cried.
“I ... I’ve not exactly thought it,” muttered Alyosha, “but directly youbegan speaking so strangely, I fancied I had thought of it myself.”
“You see? (And how well you expressed it!) Looking at your father and yourbrother Mitya to‐day you thought of a crime. Then I’m not mistaken?”
“But wait, wait a minute,” Alyosha broke in uneasily. “What has led you tosee all this? Why does it interest you? That’s the first question.”
“Two questions, disconnected, but natural. I’ll deal with them separately.What led me to see it? I shouldn’t have seen it, if I hadn’t suddenlyunderstood your brother Dmitri, seen right into the very heart of him allat once. I caught the whole man from one trait. These very honest butpassionate people have a line which mustn’t be crossed. If it were, he’drun at your father with a knife. But your father’s a drunken and abandonedold sinner, who can never draw the line—if they both let themselves go,they’ll both come to grief.”
“No, Misha, no. If that’s all, you’ve reassured me. It won’t come tothat.”
“But why are you trembling? Let me tell you; he may be honest, our Mitya(he is stupid, but honest), but he’s—a sensualist. That’s the verydefinition and inner essence of him. It’s your father has handed him onhis low sensuality. Do you know, I simply wonder at you, Alyosha, how youcan have kept your purity. You’re a Karamazov too, you know! In yourfamily sensuality is carried to a disease. But now, these threesensualists are watching one another, with their knives in their belts.The three of them are knocking their heads together, and you may be thefourth.”
“You are mistaken about that woman. Dmitri—despises her,” said Alyosha,with a sort of shudder.
“Grushenka? No, brother, he doesn’t despise her. Since he has openlyabandoned his betrothed for her, he doesn’t despise her. There’s somethinghere, my dear boy, that you don’t understand yet. A man will fall in lovewith some beauty, with a woman’s body, or even with a part of a woman’sbody (a sensualist can understand that), and he’ll abandon his ownchildren for her, sell his father and mother, and his country, Russia,too. If he’s honest, he’ll steal; if he’s humane, he’ll murder; if he’sfaithful, he’ll deceive. Pushkin, the poet of women’s feet, sung of theirfeet in his verse. Others don’t sing their praises, but they can’t look attheir feet without a thrill—and it’s not only their feet. Contempt’s nohelp here, brother, even if he did despise Grushenka. He does, but hecan’t tear himself away.”
“I understand that,” Alyosha jerked out suddenly.
“Really? Well, I dare say you do understand, since you blurt it out at thefirst word,” said Rakitin, malignantly. “That escaped you unawares, andthe confession’s the more precious. So it’s a familiar subject; you’vethought about it already, about sensuality, I mean! Oh, you virgin soul!You’re a quiet one, Alyosha, you’re a saint, I know, but the devil onlyknows what you’ve thought about, and what you know already! You are pure,but you’ve been down into the depths.... I’ve been watching you a longtime. You’re a Karamazov yourself; you’re a thorough Karamazov—no doubtbirth and selection have something to answer for. You’re a sensualist fromyour father, a crazy saint from your mother. Why do you tremble? Is ittrue, then? Do you know, Grushenka has been begging me to bring you along.‘I’ll pull off his cassock,’ she says. You can’t think how she keepsbegging me to bring you. I wondered why she took such an interest in you.Do you know, she’s an extraordinary woman, too!”
“Thank her and say I’m not coming,” said Alyosha, with a strained smile.“Finish what you were saying, Misha. I’ll tell you my idea after.”
“There’s nothing to finish. It’s all clear. It’s the same old tune,brother. If even you are a sensualist at heart, what of your brother,Ivan? He’s a Karamazov, too. What is at the root of all you Karamazovs isthat you’re all sensual, grasping and crazy! Your brother Ivan writestheological articles in joke, for some idiotic, unknown motive of his own,though he’s an atheist, and he admits it’s a fraud himself—that’s yourbrother Ivan. He’s trying to get Mitya’s betrothed for himself, and Ifancy he’ll succeed, too. And what’s more, it’s with Mitya’s consent. ForMitya will surrender his betrothed to him to be rid of her, and escape toGrushenka. And he’s ready to do that in spite of all his nobility anddisinterestedness. Observe that. Those are the most fatal people! Who thedevil can make you out? He recognizes his vileness and goes on with it!Let me tell you, too, the old man, your father, is standing in Mitya’s waynow. He has suddenly gone crazy over Grushenka. His mouth waters at thesight of her. It’s simply on her account he made that scene in the celljust now, simply because Miüsov called her an ‘abandoned creature.’ He’sworse than a tom‐cat in love. At first she was only employed by him inconnection with his taverns and in some other shady business, but now hehas suddenly realized all she is and has gone wild about her. He keepspestering her with his offers, not honorable ones, of course. And they’llcome into collision, the precious father and son, on that path! ButGrushenka favors neither of them, she’s still playing with them, andteasing them both, considering which she can get most out of. For thoughshe could filch a lot of money from the papa he wouldn’t marry her, andmaybe he’ll turn stingy in the end, and keep his purse shut. That’s whereMitya’s value comes in; he has no money, but he’s ready to marry her. Yes,ready to marry her! to abandon his betrothed, a rare beauty, KaterinaIvanovna, who’s rich, and the daughter of a colonel, and to marryGrushenka, who has been the mistress of a dissolute old merchant,Samsonov, a coarse, uneducated, provincial mayor. Some murderous conflictmay well come to pass from all this, and that’s what your brother Ivan iswaiting for. It would suit him down to the ground. He’ll carry offKaterina Ivanovna, for whom he is languishing, and pocket her dowry ofsixty thousand. That’s very alluring to start with, for a man of noconsequence and a beggar. And, take note, he won’t be wronging Mitya, butdoing him the greatest service. For I know as a fact that Mitya only lastweek, when he was with some gypsy girls drunk in a tavern, cried out aloudthat he was unworthy of his betrothed, Katya, but that his brother Ivan,he was the man who deserved her. And Katerina Ivanovna will not in the endrefuse such a fascinating man as Ivan. She’s hesitating between the two ofthem already. And how has that Ivan won you all, so that you all worshiphim? He is laughing at you, and enjoying himself at your expense.”
“How do you know? How can you speak so confidently?” Alyosha askedsharply, frowning.
“Why do you ask, and are frightened at my answer? It shows that you knowI’m speaking the truth.”
“You don’t like Ivan. Ivan wouldn’t be tempted by money.”
“Really? And the beauty of Katerina Ivanovna? It’s not only the money,though a fortune of sixty thousand is an attraction.”
“Ivan is above that. He wouldn’t make up to any one for thousands. It isnot money, it’s not comfort Ivan is seeking. Perhaps it’s suffering he isseeking.”
“What wild dream now? Oh, you—aristocrats!”
“Ah, Misha, he has a stormy spirit. His mind is in bondage. He is hauntedby a great, unsolved doubt. He is one of those who don’t want millions,but an answer to their questions.”
“That’s plagiarism, Alyosha. You’re quoting your elder’s phrases. Ah, Ivanhas set you a problem!” cried Rakitin, with undisguised malice. His facechanged, and his lips twitched. “And the problem’s a stupid one. It is nogood guessing it. Rack your brains—you’ll understand it. His article isabsurd and ridiculous. And did you hear his stupid theory just now: ifthere’s no immortality of the soul, then there’s no virtue, and everythingis lawful. (And by the way, do you remember how your brother Mitya criedout: ‘I will remember!’) An attractive theory for scoundrels!—(I’m beingabusive, that’s stupid.) Not for scoundrels, but for pedantic _poseurs_,‘haunted by profound, unsolved doubts.’ He’s showing off, and what it allcomes to is, ‘on the one hand we cannot but admit’ and ‘on the other itmust be confessed!’ His whole theory is a fraud! Humanity will find initself the power to live for virtue even without believing in immortality.It will find it in love for freedom, for equality, for fraternity.”
Rakitin could hardly restrain himself in his heat, but, suddenly, asthough remembering something, he stopped short.
“Well, that’s enough,” he said, with a still more crooked smile. “Why areyou laughing? Do you think I’m a vulgar fool?”
“No, I never dreamed of thinking you a vulgar fool. You are clever but ...never mind, I was silly to smile. I understand your getting hot about it,Misha. I guess from your warmth that you are not indifferent to KaterinaIvanovna yourself; I’ve suspected that for a long time, brother, that’swhy you don’t like my brother Ivan. Are you jealous of him?”
“And jealous of her money, too? Won’t you add that?”
“I’ll say nothing about money. I am not going to insult you.”
“I believe it, since you say so, but confound you, and your brother Ivanwith you. Don’t you understand that one might very well dislike him, apartfrom Katerina Ivanovna. And why the devil should I like him? Hecondescends to abuse me, you know. Why haven’t I a right to abuse him?”
“I never heard of his saying anything about you, good or bad. He doesn’tspeak of you at all.”
“But I heard that the day before yesterday at Katerina Ivanovna’s he wasabusing me for all he was worth—you see what an interest he takes in yourhumble servant. And which is the jealous one after that, brother, I can’tsay. He was so good as to express the opinion that, if I don’t go in forthe career of an archimandrite in the immediate future and don’t become amonk, I shall be sure to go to Petersburg and get on to some solidmagazine as a reviewer, that I shall write for the next ten years, and inthe end become the owner of the magazine, and bring it out on the liberaland atheistic side, with a socialistic tinge, with a tiny gloss ofsocialism, but keeping a sharp look out all the time, that is, keeping inwith both sides and hoodwinking the fools. According to your brother’saccount, the tinge of socialism won’t hinder me from laying by theproceeds and investing them under the guidance of some Jew, till at theend of my career I build a great house in Petersburg and move mypublishing offices to it, and let out the upper stories to lodgers. He haseven chosen the place for it, near the new stone bridge across the Neva,which they say is to be built in Petersburg.”
“Ah, Misha, that’s just what will really happen, every word of it,” criedAlyosha, unable to restrain a good‐humored smile.
“You are pleased to be sarcastic, too, Alexey Fyodorovitch.”
“No, no, I’m joking, forgive me. I’ve something quite different in mymind. But, excuse me, who can have told you all this? You can’t have beenat Katerina Ivanovna’s yourself when he was talking about you?”
“I wasn’t there, but Dmitri Fyodorovitch was; and I heard him tell it withmy own ears; if you want to know, he didn’t tell me, but I overheard him,unintentionally, of course, for I was sitting in Grushenka’s bedroom and Icouldn’t go away because Dmitri Fyodorovitch was in the next room.”
“Oh, yes, I’d forgotten she was a relation of yours.”
“A relation! That Grushenka a relation of mine!” cried Rakitin, turningcrimson. “Are you mad? You’re out of your mind!”
“Why, isn’t she a relation of yours? I heard so.”
“Where can you have heard it? You Karamazovs brag of being an ancient,noble family, though your father used to run about playing the buffoon atother men’s tables, and was only admitted to the kitchen as a favor. I maybe only a priest’s son, and dirt in the eyes of noblemen like you, butdon’t insult me so lightly and wantonly. I have a sense of honor, too,Alexey Fyodorovitch, I couldn’t be a relation of Grushenka, a commonharlot. I beg you to understand that!”
Rakitin was intensely irritated.
“Forgive me, for goodness’ sake, I had no idea ... besides ... how can youcall her a harlot? Is she ... that sort of woman?” Alyosha flushedsuddenly. “I tell you again, I heard that she was a relation of yours. Youoften go to see her, and you told me yourself you’re not her lover. Inever dreamed that you of all people had such contempt for her! Does shereally deserve it?”
“I may have reasons of my own for visiting her. That’s not your business.But as for relationship, your brother, or even your father, is more likelyto make her yours than mine. Well, here we are. You’d better go to thekitchen. Hullo! what’s wrong, what is it? Are we late? They can’t havefinished dinner so soon! Have the Karamazovs been making trouble again? Nodoubt they have. Here’s your father and your brother Ivan after him.They’ve broken out from the Father Superior’s. And look, Father Isidor’sshouting out something after them from the steps. And your father’sshouting and waving his arms. I expect he’s swearing. Bah, and there goesMiüsov driving away in his carriage. You see, he’s going. And there’s oldMaximov running!—there must have been a row. There can’t have been anydinner. Surely they’ve not been beating the Father Superior! Or have they,perhaps, been beaten? It would serve them right!”
There was reason for Rakitin’s exclamations. There had been a scandalous,an unprecedented scene. It had all come from the impulse of a moment.


Chapter VIII. The Scandalous Scene

Miüsov, as a man of breeding and delicacy, could not but feel some inwardqualms, when he reached the Father Superior’s with Ivan: he felt ashamedof having lost his temper. He felt that he ought to have disdained thatdespicable wretch, Fyodor Pavlovitch, too much to have been upset by himin Father Zossima’s cell, and so to have forgotten himself. “The monkswere not to blame, in any case,” he reflected, on the steps. “And ifthey’re decent people here (and the Father Superior, I understand, is anobleman) why not be friendly and courteous with them? I won’t argue, I’llfall in with everything, I’ll win them by politeness, and ... and ... showthem that I’ve nothing to do with that Æsop, that buffoon, that Pierrot,and have merely been taken in over this affair, just as they have.”
He determined to drop his litigation with the monastery, and relinquishhis claims to the wood‐cutting and fishery rights at once. He was the moreready to do this because the rights had become much less valuable, and hehad indeed the vaguest idea where the wood and river in question were.
These excellent intentions were strengthened when he entered the FatherSuperior’s dining‐room, though, strictly speaking, it was not a dining‐room, for the Father Superior had only two rooms altogether; they were,however, much larger and more comfortable than Father Zossima’s. But therewas no great luxury about the furnishing of these rooms either. Thefurniture was of mahogany, covered with leather, in the old‐fashionedstyle of 1820; the floor was not even stained, but everything was shiningwith cleanliness, and there were many choice flowers in the windows; themost sumptuous thing in the room at the moment was, of course, thebeautifully decorated table. The cloth was clean, the service shone; therewere three kinds of well‐baked bread, two bottles of wine, two ofexcellent mead, and a large glass jug of kvas—both the latter made in themonastery, and famous in the neighborhood. There was no vodka. Rakitinrelated afterwards that there were five dishes: fish‐soup made ofsterlets, served with little fish patties; then boiled fish served in aspecial way; then salmon cutlets, ice pudding and compote, and finally,blanc‐mange. Rakitin found out about all these good things, for he couldnot resist peeping into the kitchen, where he already had a footing. Hehad a footing everywhere, and got information about everything. He was ofan uneasy and envious temper. He was well aware of his own considerableabilities, and nervously exaggerated them in his self‐conceit. He knew hewould play a prominent part of some sort, but Alyosha, who was attached tohim, was distressed to see that his friend Rakitin was dishonorable, andquite unconscious of being so himself, considering, on the contrary, thatbecause he would not steal money left on the table he was a man of thehighest integrity. Neither Alyosha nor any one else could have influencedhim in that.
Rakitin, of course, was a person of too little consequence to be invitedto the dinner, to which Father Iosif, Father Païssy, and one other monkwere the only inmates of the monastery invited. They were already waitingwhen Miüsov, Kalganov, and Ivan arrived. The other guest, Maximov, stood alittle aside, waiting also. The Father Superior stepped into the middle ofthe room to receive his guests. He was a tall, thin, but still vigorousold man, with black hair streaked with gray, and a long, grave, asceticface. He bowed to his guests in silence. But this time they approached toreceive his blessing. Miüsov even tried to kiss his hand, but the FatherSuperior drew it back in time to avoid the salute. But Ivan and Kalganovwent through the ceremony in the most simple‐hearted and complete manner,kissing his hand as peasants do.
“We must apologize most humbly, your reverence,” began Miüsov, simperingaffably, and speaking in a dignified and respectful tone. “Pardon us forhaving come alone without the gentleman you invited, Fyodor Pavlovitch. Hefelt obliged to decline the honor of your hospitality, and not withoutreason. In the reverend Father Zossima’s cell he was carried away by theunhappy dissension with his son, and let fall words which were quite outof keeping ... in fact, quite unseemly ... as”—he glanced at themonks—“your reverence is, no doubt, already aware. And therefore,recognizing that he had been to blame, he felt sincere regret and shame,and begged me, and his son Ivan Fyodorovitch, to convey to you hisapologies and regrets. In brief, he hopes and desires to make amendslater. He asks your blessing, and begs you to forget what has takenplace.”
As he uttered the last word of his tirade, Miüsov completely recovered hisself‐complacency, and all traces of his former irritation disappeared. Hefully and sincerely loved humanity again.
The Father Superior listened to him with dignity, and, with a slight bendof the head, replied:
“I sincerely deplore his absence. Perhaps at our table he might havelearnt to like us, and we him. Pray be seated, gentlemen.”
He stood before the holy image, and began to say grace, aloud. All benttheir heads reverently, and Maximov clasped his hands before him, withpeculiar fervor.
It was at this moment that Fyodor Pavlovitch played his last prank. Itmust be noted that he really had meant to go home, and really had felt theimpossibility of going to dine with the Father Superior as though nothinghad happened, after his disgraceful behavior in the elder’s cell. Not thathe was so very much ashamed of himself—quite the contrary perhaps. Butstill he felt it would be unseemly to go to dinner. Yet his creakingcarriage had hardly been brought to the steps of the hotel, and he hadhardly got into it, when he suddenly stopped short. He remembered his ownwords at the elder’s: “I always feel when I meet people that I am lowerthan all, and that they all take me for a buffoon; so I say let me playthe buffoon, for you are, every one of you, stupider and lower than I.” Helonged to revenge himself on every one for his own unseemliness. Hesuddenly recalled how he had once in the past been asked, “Why do you hateso and so, so much?” And he had answered them, with his shamelessimpudence, “I’ll tell you. He has done me no harm. But I played him adirty trick, and ever since I have hated him.”
Remembering that now, he smiled quietly and malignantly, hesitating for amoment. His eyes gleamed, and his lips positively quivered. “Well, since Ihave begun, I may as well go on,” he decided. His predominant sensation atthat moment might be expressed in the following words, “Well, there is norehabilitating myself now. So let me shame them for all I am worth. I willshow them I don’t care what they think—that’s all!”
He told the coachman to wait, while with rapid steps he returned to themonastery and straight to the Father Superior’s. He had no clear idea whathe would do, but he knew that he could not control himself, and that atouch might drive him to the utmost limits of obscenity, but only toobscenity, to nothing criminal, nothing for which he could be legallypunished. In the last resort, he could always restrain himself, and hadmarveled indeed at himself, on that score, sometimes. He appeared in theFather Superior’s dining‐room, at the moment when the prayer was over, andall were moving to the table. Standing in the doorway, he scanned thecompany, and laughing his prolonged, impudent, malicious chuckle, lookedthem all boldly in the face. “They thought I had gone, and here I amagain,” he cried to the whole room.
For one moment every one stared at him without a word; and at once everyone felt that something revolting, grotesque, positively scandalous, wasabout to happen. Miüsov passed immediately from the most benevolent frameof mind to the most savage. All the feelings that had subsided and dieddown in his heart revived instantly.
“No! this I cannot endure!” he cried. “I absolutely cannot! and ... Icertainly cannot!”
The blood rushed to his head. He positively stammered; but he was beyondthinking of style, and he seized his hat.
“What is it he cannot?” cried Fyodor Pavlovitch, “that he absolutelycannot and certainly cannot? Your reverence, am I to come in or not? Willyou receive me as your guest?”
“You are welcome with all my heart,” answered the Superior. “Gentlemen!”he added, “I venture to beg you most earnestly to lay aside yourdissensions, and to be united in love and family harmony—with prayer tothe Lord at our humble table.”
“No, no, it is impossible!” cried Miüsov, beside himself.
“Well, if it is impossible for Pyotr Alexandrovitch, it is impossible forme, and I won’t stop. That is why I came. I will keep with PyotrAlexandrovitch everywhere now. If you will go away, Pyotr Alexandrovitch,I will go away too, if you remain, I will remain. You stung him by whatyou said about family harmony, Father Superior, he does not admit he is myrelation. That’s right, isn’t it, von Sohn? Here’s von Sohn. How are you,von Sohn?”
“Do you mean me?” muttered Maximov, puzzled.
“Of course I mean you,” cried Fyodor Pavlovitch. “Who else? The FatherSuperior could not be von Sohn.”
“But I am not von Sohn either. I am Maximov.”
“No, you are von Sohn. Your reverence, do you know who von Sohn was? Itwas a famous murder case. He was killed in a house of harlotry—I believethat is what such places are called among you—he was killed and robbed,and in spite of his venerable age, he was nailed up in a box and sent fromPetersburg to Moscow in the luggage van, and while they were nailing himup, the harlots sang songs and played the harp, that is to say, the piano.So this is that very von Sohn. He has risen from the dead, hasn’t he, vonSohn?”
“What is happening? What’s this?” voices were heard in the group of monks.
“Let us go,” cried Miüsov, addressing Kalganov.
“No, excuse me,” Fyodor Pavlovitch broke in shrilly, taking another stepinto the room. “Allow me to finish. There in the cell you blamed me forbehaving disrespectfully just because I spoke of eating gudgeon, PyotrAlexandrovitch. Miüsov, my relation, prefers to have _plus de noblesse quede sincérité_ in his words, but I prefer in mine _plus de sincérité que denoblesse_, and—damn the _noblesse_! That’s right, isn’t it, von Sohn?Allow me, Father Superior, though I am a buffoon and play the buffoon, yetI am the soul of honor, and I want to speak my mind. Yes, I am the soul ofhonor, while in Pyotr Alexandrovitch there is wounded vanity and nothingelse. I came here perhaps to have a look and speak my mind. My son,Alexey, is here, being saved. I am his father; I care for his welfare, andit is my duty to care. While I’ve been playing the fool, I have beenlistening and having a look on the sly; and now I want to give you thelast act of the performance. You know how things are with us? As a thingfalls, so it lies. As a thing once has fallen, so it must lie for ever.Not a bit of it! I want to get up again. Holy Father, I am indignant withyou. Confession is a great sacrament, before which I am ready to bow downreverently; but there in the cell, they all kneel down and confess aloud.Can it be right to confess aloud? It was ordained by the holy Fathers toconfess in secret: then only your confession will be a mystery, and so itwas of old. But how can I explain to him before every one that I did thisand that ... well, you understand what—sometimes it would not be proper totalk about it—so it is really a scandal! No, Fathers, one might be carriedalong with you to the Flagellants, I dare say ... at the first opportunityI shall write to the Synod, and I shall take my son, Alexey, home.”
We must note here that Fyodor Pavlovitch knew where to look for the weakspot. There had been at one time malicious rumors which had even reachedthe Archbishop (not only regarding our monastery, but in others where theinstitution of elders existed) that too much respect was paid to theelders, even to the detriment of the authority of the Superior, that theelders abused the sacrament of confession and so on and so on—absurdcharges which had died away of themselves everywhere. But the spirit offolly, which had caught up Fyodor Pavlovitch, and was bearing him on thecurrent of his own nerves into lower and lower depths of ignominy,prompted him with this old slander. Fyodor Pavlovitch did not understand aword of it, and he could not even put it sensibly, for on this occasion noone had been kneeling and confessing aloud in the elder’s cell, so that hecould not have seen anything of the kind. He was only speaking fromconfused memory of old slanders. But as soon as he had uttered his foolishtirade, he felt he had been talking absurd nonsense, and at once longed toprove to his audience, and above all to himself, that he had not beentalking nonsense. And, though he knew perfectly well that with each wordhe would be adding more and more absurdity, he could not restrain himself,and plunged forward blindly.
“How disgraceful!” cried Pyotr Alexandrovitch.
“Pardon me!” said the Father Superior. “It was said of old, ‘Many havebegun to speak against me and have uttered evil sayings about me. Andhearing it I have said to myself: it is the correction of the Lord and Hehas sent it to heal my vain soul.’ And so we humbly thank you, honoredguest!” and he made Fyodor Pavlovitch a low bow.
“Tut—tut—tut—sanctimoniousness and stock phrases! Old phrases and oldgestures. The old lies and formal prostrations. We know all about them. Akiss on the lips and a dagger in the heart, as in Schiller’s _Robbers_. Idon’t like falsehood, Fathers, I want the truth. But the truth is not tobe found in eating gudgeon and that I proclaim aloud! Father monks, why doyou fast? Why do you expect reward in heaven for that? Why, for rewardlike that I will come and fast too! No, saintly monk, you try beingvirtuous in the world, do good to society, without shutting yourself up ina monastery at other people’s expense, and without expecting a reward upaloft for it—you’ll find that a bit harder. I can talk sense, too, FatherSuperior. What have they got here?” He went up to the table. “Old portwine, mead brewed by the Eliseyev Brothers. Fie, fie, fathers! That issomething beyond gudgeon. Look at the bottles the fathers have broughtout, he he he! And who has provided it all? The Russian peasant, thelaborer, brings here the farthing earned by his horny hand, wringing itfrom his family and the tax‐gatherer! You bleed the people, you know, holyfathers.”
“This is too disgraceful!” said Father Iosif.
Father Païssy kept obstinately silent. Miüsov rushed from the room, andKalganov after him.
“Well, Father, I will follow Pyotr Alexandrovitch! I am not coming to seeyou again. You may beg me on your knees, I shan’t come. I sent you athousand roubles, so you have begun to keep your eye on me. He he he! No,I’ll say no more. I am taking my revenge for my youth, for all thehumiliation I endured.” He thumped the table with his fist in a paroxysmof simulated feeling. “This monastery has played a great part in my life!It has cost me many bitter tears. You used to set my wife, the crazy one,against me. You cursed me with bell and book, you spread stories about meall over the place. Enough, fathers! This is the age of Liberalism, theage of steamers and railways. Neither a thousand, nor a hundred roubles,no, nor a hundred farthings will you get out of me!”
It must be noted again that our monastery never had played any great partin his life, and he never had shed a bitter tear owing to it. But he wasso carried away by his simulated emotion, that he was for one momentalmost believing it himself. He was so touched he was almost weeping. Butat that very instant, he felt that it was time to draw back.
The Father Superior bowed his head at his malicious lie, and again spokeimpressively:
“It is written again, ‘Bear circumspectly and gladly dishonor that comethupon thee by no act of thine own, be not confounded and hate not him whohath dishonored thee.’ And so will we.”
“Tut, tut, tut! Bethinking thyself and the rest of the rigmarole. Bethinkyourselves, Fathers, I will go. But I will take my son, Alexey, away fromhere for ever, on my parental authority. Ivan Fyodorovitch, my mostdutiful son, permit me to order you to follow me. Von Sohn, what have youto stay for? Come and see me now in the town. It is fun there. It is onlyone short verst; instead of lenten oil, I will give you sucking‐pig andkasha. We will have dinner with some brandy and liqueur to it.... I’vecloudberry wine. Hey, von Sohn, don’t lose your chance.” He went out,shouting and gesticulating.
It was at that moment Rakitin saw him and pointed him out to Alyosha.
“Alexey!” his father shouted, from far off, catching sight of him. “Youcome home to me to‐day, for good, and bring your pillow and mattress, andleave no trace behind.”
Alyosha stood rooted to the spot, watching the scene in silence.Meanwhile, Fyodor Pavlovitch had got into the carriage, and Ivan was aboutto follow him in grim silence without even turning to say good‐by toAlyosha. But at this point another almost incredible scene of grotesquebuffoonery gave the finishing touch to the episode. Maximov suddenlyappeared by the side of the carriage. He ran up, panting, afraid of beingtoo late. Rakitin and Alyosha saw him running. He was in such a hurry thatin his impatience he put his foot on the step on which Ivan’s left footwas still resting, and clutching the carriage he kept trying to jump in.“I am going with you!” he kept shouting, laughing a thin mirthful laughwith a look of reckless glee in his face. “Take me, too.”
“There!” cried Fyodor Pavlovitch, delighted. “Did I not say he was vonSohn. It is von Sohn himself, risen from the dead. Why, how did you tearyourself away? What did you _vonsohn_ there? And how could you get awayfrom the dinner? You must be a brazen‐faced fellow! I am that myself, butI am surprised at you, brother! Jump in, jump in! Let him pass, Ivan. Itwill be fun. He can lie somewhere at our feet. Will you lie at our feet,von Sohn? Or perch on the box with the coachman. Skip on to the box, vonSohn!”
But Ivan, who had by now taken his seat, without a word gave Maximov aviolent punch in the breast and sent him flying. It was quite by chance hedid not fall.
“Drive on!” Ivan shouted angrily to the coachman.
“Why, what are you doing, what are you about? Why did you do that?” FyodorPavlovitch protested.
But the carriage had already driven away. Ivan made no reply.
“Well, you are a fellow,” Fyodor Pavlovitch said again.
After a pause of two minutes, looking askance at his son, “Why, it was yougot up all this monastery business. You urged it, you approved of it. Whyare you angry now?”
“You’ve talked rot enough. You might rest a bit now,” Ivan snappedsullenly.
Fyodor Pavlovitch was silent again for two minutes.
“A drop of brandy would be nice now,” he observed sententiously, but Ivanmade no response.
“You shall have some, too, when we get home.”
Ivan was still silent.
Fyodor Pavlovitch waited another two minutes.
“But I shall take Alyosha away from the monastery, though you will dislikeit so much, most honored Karl von Moor.”
Ivan shrugged his shoulders contemptuously, and turning away stared at theroad. And they did not speak again all the way home.



Book III. The Sensualists


Chapter I. In The Servants’ Quarters

The Karamazovs’ house was far from being in the center of the town, but itwas not quite outside it. It was a pleasant‐looking old house of twostories, painted gray, with a red iron roof. It was roomy and snug, andmight still last many years. There were all sorts of unexpected littlecupboards and closets and staircases. There were rats in it, but FyodorPavlovitch did not altogether dislike them. “One doesn’t feel so solitarywhen one’s left alone in the evening,” he used to say. It was his habit tosend the servants away to the lodge for the night and to lock himself upalone. The lodge was a roomy and solid building in the yard. FyodorPavlovitch used to have the cooking done there, although there was akitchen in the house; he did not like the smell of cooking, and, winterand summer alike, the dishes were carried in across the courtyard. Thehouse was built for a large family; there was room for five times as many,with their servants. But at the time of our story there was no one livingin the house but Fyodor Pavlovitch and his son Ivan. And in the lodgethere were only three servants: old Grigory, and his old wife Marfa, and ayoung man called Smerdyakov. Of these three we must say a few words. Ofold Grigory we have said something already. He was firm and determined andwent blindly and obstinately for his object, if once he had been broughtby any reasons (and they were often very illogical ones) to believe thatit was immutably right. He was honest and incorruptible. His wife, MarfaIgnatyevna, had obeyed her husband’s will implicitly all her life, yet shehad pestered him terribly after the emancipation of the serfs. She was seton leaving Fyodor Pavlovitch and opening a little shop in Moscow withtheir small savings. But Grigory decided then, once for all, that “thewoman’s talking nonsense, for every woman is dishonest,” and that theyought not to leave their old master, whatever he might be, for “that wasnow their duty.”
“Do you understand what duty is?” he asked Marfa Ignatyevna.
“I understand what duty means, Grigory Vassilyevitch, but why it’s ourduty to stay here I never shall understand,” Marfa answered firmly.
“Well, don’t understand then. But so it shall be. And you hold yourtongue.”
And so it was. They did not go away, and Fyodor Pavlovitch promised them asmall sum for wages, and paid it regularly. Grigory knew, too, that he hadan indisputable influence over his master. It was true, and he was awareof it. Fyodor Pavlovitch was an obstinate and cunning buffoon, yet, thoughhis will was strong enough “in some of the affairs of life,” as heexpressed it, he found himself, to his surprise, extremely feeble infacing certain other emergencies. He knew his weaknesses and was afraid ofthem. There are positions in which one has to keep a sharp look out. Andthat’s not easy without a trustworthy man, and Grigory was a mosttrustworthy man. Many times in the course of his life Fyodor Pavlovitchhad only just escaped a sound thrashing through Grigory’s intervention,and on each occasion the old servant gave him a good lecture. But itwasn’t only thrashings that Fyodor Pavlovitch was afraid of. There weregraver occasions, and very subtle and complicated ones, when FyodorPavlovitch could not have explained the extraordinary craving for some onefaithful and devoted, which sometimes unaccountably came upon him all in amoment. It was almost a morbid condition. Corrupt and often cruel in hislust, like some noxious insect, Fyodor Pavlovitch was sometimes, inmoments of drunkenness, overcome by superstitious terror and a moralconvulsion which took an almost physical form. “My soul’s simply quakingin my throat at those times,” he used to say. At such moments he liked tofeel that there was near at hand, in the lodge if not in the room, astrong, faithful man, virtuous and unlike himself, who had seen all hisdebauchery and knew all his secrets, but was ready in his devotion tooverlook all that, not to oppose him, above all, not to reproach him orthreaten him with anything, either in this world or in the next, and, incase of need, to defend him—from whom? From somebody unknown, but terribleand dangerous. What he needed was to feel that there was _another_ man, anold and tried friend, that he might call him in his sick moments merely tolook at his face, or, perhaps, exchange some quite irrelevant words withhim. And if the old servant were not angry, he felt comforted, and if hewere angry, he was more dejected. It happened even (very rarely however)that Fyodor Pavlovitch went at night to the lodge to wake Grigory andfetch him for a moment. When the old man came, Fyodor Pavlovitch wouldbegin talking about the most trivial matters, and would soon let him goagain, sometimes even with a jest. And after he had gone, FyodorPavlovitch would get into bed with a curse and sleep the sleep of thejust. Something of the same sort had happened to Fyodor Pavlovitch onAlyosha’s arrival. Alyosha “pierced his heart” by “living with him, seeingeverything and blaming nothing.” Moreover, Alyosha brought with himsomething his father had never known before: a complete absence ofcontempt for him and an invariable kindness, a perfectly naturalunaffected devotion to the old man who deserved it so little. All this wasa complete surprise to the old profligate, who had dropped all familyties. It was a new and surprising experience for him, who had till thenloved nothing but “evil.” When Alyosha had left him, he confessed tohimself that he had learnt something he had not till then been willing tolearn.
I have mentioned already that Grigory had detested Adelaïda Ivanovna, thefirst wife of Fyodor Pavlovitch and the mother of Dmitri, and that he had,on the contrary, protected Sofya Ivanovna, the poor “crazy woman,” againsthis master and any one who chanced to speak ill or lightly of her. Hissympathy for the unhappy wife had become something sacred to him, so thateven now, twenty years after, he could not bear a slighting allusion toher from any one, and would at once check the offender. Externally,Grigory was cold, dignified and taciturn, and spoke, weighing his words,without frivolity. It was impossible to tell at first sight whether heloved his meek, obedient wife; but he really did love her, and she knewit.
Marfa Ignatyevna was by no means foolish; she was probably, indeed,cleverer than her husband, or, at least, more prudent than he in worldlyaffairs, and yet she had given in to him in everything without question orcomplaint ever since her marriage, and respected him for his spiritualsuperiority. It was remarkable how little they spoke to one another in thecourse of their lives, and only of the most necessary daily affairs. Thegrave and dignified Grigory thought over all his cares and duties alone,so that Marfa Ignatyevna had long grown used to knowing that he did notneed her advice. She felt that her husband respected her silence, and tookit as a sign of her good sense. He had never beaten her but once, and thenonly slightly. Once during the year after Fyodor Pavlovitch’s marriagewith Adelaïda Ivanovna, the village girls and women—at that timeserfs—were called together before the house to sing and dance. They werebeginning “In the Green Meadows,” when Marfa, at that time a young woman,skipped forward and danced “the Russian Dance,” not in the villagefashion, but as she had danced it when she was a servant in the service ofthe rich Miüsov family, in their private theater, where the actors weretaught to dance by a dancing master from Moscow. Grigory saw how his wifedanced, and, an hour later, at home in their cottage he gave her a lesson,pulling her hair a little. But there it ended: the beating was neverrepeated, and Marfa Ignatyevna gave up dancing.
God had not blessed them with children. One child was born but it died.Grigory was fond of children, and was not ashamed of showing it. WhenAdelaïda Ivanovna had run away, Grigory took Dmitri, then a child of threeyears old, combed his hair and washed him in a tub with his own hands, andlooked after him for almost a year. Afterwards he had looked after Ivanand Alyosha, for which the general’s widow had rewarded him with a slap inthe face; but I have already related all that. The only happiness his ownchild had brought him had been in the anticipation of its birth. When itwas born, he was overwhelmed with grief and horror. The baby had sixfingers. Grigory was so crushed by this, that he was not only silent tillthe day of the christening, but kept away in the garden. It was spring,and he spent three days digging the kitchen garden. The third day wasfixed for christening the baby: mean‐time Grigory had reached aconclusion. Going into the cottage where the clergy were assembled and thevisitors had arrived, including Fyodor Pavlovitch, who was to stand god‐father, he suddenly announced that the baby “ought not to be christened atall.” He announced this quietly, briefly, forcing out his words, andgazing with dull intentness at the priest.
“Why not?” asked the priest with good‐humored surprise.
“Because it’s a dragon,” muttered Grigory.
“A dragon? What dragon?”
Grigory did not speak for some time. “It’s a confusion of nature,” hemuttered vaguely, but firmly, and obviously unwilling to say more.
They laughed, and of course christened the poor baby. Grigory prayedearnestly at the font, but his opinion of the new‐born child remainedunchanged. Yet he did not interfere in any way. As long as the sicklyinfant lived he scarcely looked at it, tried indeed not to notice it, andfor the most part kept out of the cottage. But when, at the end of afortnight, the baby died of thrush, he himself laid the child in itslittle coffin, looked at it in profound grief, and when they were fillingup the shallow little grave he fell on his knees and bowed down to theearth. He did not for years afterwards mention his child, nor did Marfaspeak of the baby before him, and, even if Grigory were not present, shenever spoke of it above a whisper. Marfa observed that, from the day ofthe burial, he devoted himself to “religion,” and took to reading the_Lives of the Saints_, for the most part sitting alone and in silence, andalways putting on his big, round, silver‐rimmed spectacles. He rarely readaloud, only perhaps in Lent. He was fond of the Book of Job, and hadsomehow got hold of a copy of the sayings and sermons of “the God‐fearingFather Isaac the Syrian,” which he read persistently for years together,understanding very little of it, but perhaps prizing and loving it themore for that. Of late he had begun to listen to the doctrines of the sectof Flagellants settled in the neighborhood. He was evidently shaken bythem, but judged it unfitting to go over to the new faith. His habit oftheological reading gave him an expression of still greater gravity.
He was perhaps predisposed to mysticism. And the birth of his deformedchild, and its death, had, as though by special design, been accompaniedby another strange and marvelous event, which, as he said later, had lefta “stamp” upon his soul. It happened that, on the very night after theburial of his child, Marfa was awakened by the wail of a new‐born baby.She was frightened and waked her husband. He listened and said he thoughtit was more like some one groaning, “it might be a woman.” He got up anddressed. It was a rather warm night in May. As he went down the steps, hedistinctly heard groans coming from the garden. But the gate from the yardinto the garden was locked at night, and there was no other way ofentering it, for it was enclosed all round by a strong, high fence. Goingback into the house, Grigory lighted a lantern, took the garden key, andtaking no notice of the hysterical fears of his wife, who was stillpersuaded that she heard a child crying, and that it was her own babycrying and calling for her, went into the garden in silence. There heheard at once that the groans came from the bath‐house that stood near thegarden gate, and that they were the groans of a woman. Opening the door ofthe bath‐house, he saw a sight which petrified him. An idiot girl, whowandered about the streets and was known to the whole town by the nicknameof Lizaveta Smerdyastchaya (Stinking Lizaveta), had got into the bath‐house and had just given birth to a child. She lay dying with the babybeside her. She said nothing, for she had never been able to speak. Buther story needs a chapter to itself.


Chapter II. Lizaveta

There was one circumstance which struck Grigory particularly, andconfirmed a very unpleasant and revolting suspicion. This Lizaveta was adwarfish creature, “not five foot within a wee bit,” as many of the piousold women said pathetically about her, after her death. Her broad,healthy, red face had a look of blank idiocy and the fixed stare in hereyes was unpleasant, in spite of their meek expression. She wanderedabout, summer and winter alike, barefooted, wearing nothing but a hempensmock. Her coarse, almost black hair curled like lamb’s wool, and formed asort of huge cap on her head. It was always crusted with mud, and hadleaves, bits of stick, and shavings clinging to it, as she always slept onthe ground and in the dirt. Her father, a homeless, sickly drunkard,called Ilya, had lost everything and lived many years as a workman withsome well‐to‐do tradespeople. Her mother had long been dead. Spiteful anddiseased, Ilya used to beat Lizaveta inhumanly whenever she returned tohim. But she rarely did so, for every one in the town was ready to lookafter her as being an idiot, and so specially dear to God. Ilya’semployers, and many others in the town, especially of the tradespeople,tried to clothe her better, and always rigged her out with high boots andsheepskin coat for the winter. But, although she allowed them to dress herup without resisting, she usually went away, preferably to the cathedralporch, and taking off all that had been given her—kerchief, sheepskin,skirt or boots—she left them there and walked away barefoot in her smockas before. It happened on one occasion that a new governor of theprovince, making a tour of inspection in our town, saw Lizaveta, and waswounded in his tenderest susceptibilities. And though he was told she wasan idiot, he pronounced that for a young woman of twenty to wander aboutin nothing but a smock was a breach of the proprieties, and must not occuragain. But the governor went his way, and Lizaveta was left as she was. Atlast her father died, which made her even more acceptable in the eyes ofthe religious persons of the town, as an orphan. In fact, every one seemedto like her; even the boys did not tease her, and the boys of our town,especially the schoolboys, are a mischievous set. She would walk intostrange houses, and no one drove her away. Every one was kind to her andgave her something. If she were given a copper, she would take it, and atonce drop it in the alms‐jug of the church or prison. If she were given aroll or bun in the market, she would hand it to the first child she met.Sometimes she would stop one of the richest ladies in the town and give itto her, and the lady would be pleased to take it. She herself never tastedanything but black bread and water. If she went into an expensive shop,where there were costly goods or money lying about, no one kept watch onher, for they knew that if she saw thousands of roubles overlooked bythem, she would not have touched a farthing. She scarcely ever went tochurch. She slept either in the church porch or climbed over a hurdle(there are many hurdles instead of fences to this day in our town) into akitchen garden. She used at least once a week to turn up “at home,” thatis at the house of her father’s former employers, and in the winter wentthere every night, and slept either in the passage or the cowhouse. Peoplewere amazed that she could stand such a life, but she was accustomed toit, and, although she was so tiny, she was of a robust constitution. Someof the townspeople declared that she did all this only from pride, butthat is hardly credible. She could hardly speak, and only from time totime uttered an inarticulate grunt. How could she have been proud?
It happened one clear, warm, moonlight night in September (many years ago)five or six drunken revelers were returning from the club at a very latehour, according to our provincial notions. They passed through the “back‐way,” which led between the back gardens of the houses, with hurdles oneither side. This way leads out on to the bridge over the long, stinkingpool which we were accustomed to call a river. Among the nettles andburdocks under the hurdle our revelers saw Lizaveta asleep. They stoppedto look at her, laughing, and began jesting with unbridled licentiousness.It occurred to one young gentleman to make the whimsical inquiry whetherany one could possibly look upon such an animal as a woman, and soforth.... They all pronounced with lofty repugnance that it wasimpossible. But Fyodor Pavlovitch, who was among them, sprang forward anddeclared that it was by no means impossible, and that, indeed, there was acertain piquancy about it, and so on.... It is true that at that time hewas overdoing his part as a buffoon. He liked to put himself forward andentertain the company, ostensibly on equal terms, of course, though inreality he was on a servile footing with them. It was just at the timewhen he had received the news of his first wife’s death in Petersburg,and, with crape upon his hat, was drinking and behaving so shamelesslythat even the most reckless among us were shocked at the sight of him. Therevelers, of course, laughed at this unexpected opinion; and one of themeven began challenging him to act upon it. The others repelled the ideaeven more emphatically, although still with the utmost hilarity, and atlast they went on their way. Later on, Fyodor Pavlovitch swore that he hadgone with them, and perhaps it was so, no one knows for certain, and noone ever knew. But five or six months later, all the town was talking,with intense and sincere indignation, of Lizaveta’s condition, and tryingto find out who was the miscreant who had wronged her. Then suddenly aterrible rumor was all over the town that this miscreant was no other thanFyodor Pavlovitch. Who set the rumor going? Of that drunken band five hadleft the town and the only one still among us was an elderly and muchrespected civil councilor, the father of grown‐up daughters, who couldhardly have spread the tale, even if there had been any foundation for it.But rumor pointed straight at Fyodor Pavlovitch, and persisted in pointingat him. Of course this was no great grievance to him: he would not havetroubled to contradict a set of tradespeople. In those days he was proud,and did not condescend to talk except in his own circle of the officialsand nobles, whom he entertained so well.
At the time, Grigory stood up for his master vigorously. He provokedquarrels and altercations in defense of him and succeeded in bringing somepeople round to his side. “It’s the wench’s own fault,” he asserted, andthe culprit was Karp, a dangerous convict, who had escaped from prison andwhose name was well known to us, as he had hidden in our town. Thisconjecture sounded plausible, for it was remembered that Karp had been inthe neighborhood just at that time in the autumn, and had robbed threepeople. But this affair and all the talk about it did not estrange popularsympathy from the poor idiot. She was better looked after than ever. Awell‐to‐do merchant’s widow named Kondratyev arranged to take her into herhouse at the end of April, meaning not to let her go out until after theconfinement. They kept a constant watch over her, but in spite of theirvigilance she escaped on the very last day, and made her way into FyodorPavlovitch’s garden. How, in her condition, she managed to climb over thehigh, strong fence remained a mystery. Some maintained that she must havebeen lifted over by somebody; others hinted at something more uncanny. Themost likely explanation is that it happened naturally—that Lizaveta,accustomed to clambering over hurdles to sleep in gardens, had somehowmanaged to climb this fence, in spite of her condition, and had leaptdown, injuring herself.
Grigory rushed to Marfa and sent her to Lizaveta, while he ran to fetch anold midwife who lived close by. They saved the baby, but Lizaveta died atdawn. Grigory took the baby, brought it home, and making his wife sitdown, put it on her lap. “A child of God—an orphan is akin to all,” hesaid, “and to us above others. Our little lost one has sent us this, whohas come from the devil’s son and a holy innocent. Nurse him and weep nomore.”
So Marfa brought up the child. He was christened Pavel, to which peoplewere not slow in adding Fyodorovitch (son of Fyodor). Fyodor Pavlovitchdid not object to any of this, and thought it amusing, though he persistedvigorously in denying his responsibility. The townspeople were pleased athis adopting the foundling. Later on, Fyodor Pavlovitch invented a surnamefor the child, calling him Smerdyakov, after his mother’s nickname.
So this Smerdyakov became Fyodor Pavlovitch’s second servant, and wasliving in the lodge with Grigory and Marfa at the time our story begins.He was employed as cook. I ought to say something of this Smerdyakov, butI am ashamed of keeping my readers’ attention so long occupied with thesecommon menials, and I will go back to my story, hoping to say more ofSmerdyakov in the course of it.


Chapter III. The Confession Of A Passionate Heart—In Verse

Alyosha remained for some time irresolute after hearing the command hisfather shouted to him from the carriage. But in spite of his uneasiness hedid not stand still. That was not his way. He went at once to the kitchento find out what his father had been doing above. Then he set off,trusting that on the way he would find some answer to the doubt tormentinghim. I hasten to add that his father’s shouts, commanding him to returnhome “with his mattress and pillow” did not frighten him in the least. Heunderstood perfectly that those peremptory shouts were merely “a flourish”to produce an effect. In the same way a tradesman in our town who wascelebrating his name‐day with a party of friends, getting angry at beingrefused more vodka, smashed up his own crockery and furniture and tore hisown and his wife’s clothes, and finally broke his windows, all for thesake of effect. Next day, of course, when he was sober, he regretted thebroken cups and saucers. Alyosha knew that his father would let him goback to the monastery next day, possibly even that evening. Moreover, hewas fully persuaded that his father might hurt any one else, but would nothurt him. Alyosha was certain that no one in the whole world ever wouldwant to hurt him, and, what is more, he knew that no one could hurt him.This was for him an axiom, assumed once for all without question, and hewent his way without hesitation, relying on it.
But at that moment an anxiety of a different sort disturbed him, andworried him the more because he could not formulate it. It was the fear ofa woman, of Katerina Ivanovna, who had so urgently entreated him in thenote handed to him by Madame Hohlakov to come and see her about something.This request and the necessity of going had at once aroused an uneasyfeeling in his heart, and this feeling had grown more and more painful allthe morning in spite of the scenes at the hermitage and at the FatherSuperior’s. He was not uneasy because he did not know what she would speakof and what he must answer. And he was not afraid of her simply as awoman. Though he knew little of women, he had spent his life, from earlychildhood till he entered the monastery, entirely with women. He wasafraid of that woman, Katerina Ivanovna. He had been afraid of her fromthe first time he saw her. He had only seen her two or three times, andhad only chanced to say a few words to her. He thought of her as abeautiful, proud, imperious girl. It was not her beauty which troubledhim, but something else. And the vagueness of his apprehension increasedthe apprehension itself. The girl’s aims were of the noblest, he knewthat. She was trying to save his brother Dmitri simply through generosity,though he had already behaved badly to her. Yet, although Alyosharecognized and did justice to all these fine and generous sentiments, ashiver began to run down his back as soon as he drew near her house.
He reflected that he would not find Ivan, who was so intimate a friend,with her, for Ivan was certainly now with his father. Dmitri he was evenmore certain not to find there, and he had a foreboding of the reason. Andso his conversation would be with her alone. He had a great longing to runand see his brother Dmitri before that fateful interview. Without showinghim the letter, he could talk to him about it. But Dmitri lived a long wayoff, and he was sure to be away from home too. Standing still for aminute, he reached a final decision. Crossing himself with a rapid andaccustomed gesture, and at once smiling, he turned resolutely in thedirection of his terrible lady.
He knew her house. If he went by the High Street and then across themarket‐place, it was a long way round. Though our town is small, it isscattered, and the houses are far apart. And meanwhile his father wasexpecting him, and perhaps had not yet forgotten his command. He might beunreasonable, and so he had to make haste to get there and back. So hedecided to take a short cut by the back‐way, for he knew every inch of theground. This meant skirting fences, climbing over hurdles, and crossingother people’s back‐yards, where every one he met knew him and greetedhim. In this way he could reach the High Street in half the time.
He had to pass the garden adjoining his father’s, and belonging to alittle tumbledown house with four windows. The owner of this house, asAlyosha knew, was a bedridden old woman, living with her daughter, who hadbeen a genteel maid‐servant in generals’ families in Petersburg. Now shehad been at home a year, looking after her sick mother. She always dressedup in fine clothes, though her old mother and she had sunk into suchpoverty that they went every day to Fyodor Pavlovitch’s kitchen for soupand bread, which Marfa gave readily. Yet, though the young woman came upfor soup, she had never sold any of her dresses, and one of these even hada long train—a fact which Alyosha had learned from Rakitin, who alwaysknew everything that was going on in the town. He had forgotten it as soonas he heard it, but now, on reaching the garden, he remembered the dresswith the train, raised his head, which had been bowed in thought, and cameupon something quite unexpected.
Over the hurdle in the garden, Dmitri, mounted on something, was leaningforward, gesticulating violently, beckoning to him, obviously afraid toutter a word for fear of being overheard. Alyosha ran up to the hurdle.
“It’s a good thing you looked up. I was nearly shouting to you,” Mityasaid in a joyful, hurried whisper. “Climb in here quickly! How splendidthat you’ve come! I was just thinking of you!”
Alyosha was delighted too, but he did not know how to get over the hurdle.Mitya put his powerful hand under his elbow to help him jump. Tucking uphis cassock, Alyosha leapt over the hurdle with the agility of a bare‐legged street urchin.
“Well done! Now come along,” said Mitya in an enthusiastic whisper.
“Where?” whispered Alyosha, looking about him and finding himself in adeserted garden with no one near but themselves. The garden was small, butthe house was at least fifty paces away.
“There’s no one here. Why do you whisper?” asked Alyosha.
“Why do I whisper? Deuce take it!” cried Dmitri at the top of his voice.“You see what silly tricks nature plays one. I am here in secret, and onthe watch. I’ll explain later on, but, knowing it’s a secret, I beganwhispering like a fool, when there’s no need. Let us go. Over there. Tillthen be quiet. I want to kiss you.

    Glory to God in the world,    Glory to God in me ...

I was just repeating that, sitting here, before you came.”
The garden was about three acres in extent, and planted with trees onlyalong the fence at the four sides. There were apple‐trees, maples, limesand birch‐trees. The middle of the garden was an empty grass space, fromwhich several hundredweight of hay was carried in the summer. The gardenwas let out for a few roubles for the summer. There were also plantationsof raspberries and currants and gooseberries laid out along the sides; akitchen garden had been planted lately near the house.
Dmitri led his brother to the most secluded corner of the garden. There,in a thicket of lime‐trees and old bushes of black currant, elder,snowball‐tree, and lilac, there stood a tumble‐down green summer‐house,blackened with age. Its walls were of lattice‐work, but there was still aroof which could give shelter. God knows when this summer‐house was built.There was a tradition that it had been put up some fifty years before by aretired colonel called von Schmidt, who owned the house at that time. Itwas all in decay, the floor was rotting, the planks were loose, thewoodwork smelled musty. In the summer‐house there was a green wooden tablefixed in the ground, and round it were some green benches upon which itwas still possible to sit. Alyosha had at once observed his brother’sexhilarated condition, and on entering the arbor he saw half a bottle ofbrandy and a wineglass on the table.
“That’s brandy,” Mitya laughed. “I see your look: ‘He’s drinking again!’Distrust the apparition.

    Distrust the worthless, lying crowd,    And lay aside thy doubts.

I’m not drinking, I’m only ‘indulging,’ as that pig, your Rakitin, says.He’ll be a civil councilor one day, but he’ll always talk about‘indulging.’ Sit down. I could take you in my arms, Alyosha, and press youto my bosom till I crush you, for in the whole world—in reality—in re‐al‐i‐ty—(can you take it in?) I love no one but you!”
He uttered the last words in a sort of exaltation.
“No one but you and one ‘jade’ I have fallen in love with, to my ruin. Butbeing in love doesn’t mean loving. You may be in love with a woman and yethate her. Remember that! I can talk about it gayly still. Sit down here bythe table and I’ll sit beside you and look at you, and go on talking. Youshall keep quiet and I’ll go on talking, for the time has come. But onreflection, you know, I’d better speak quietly, for here—here—you cannever tell what ears are listening. I will explain everything; as theysay, ‘the story will be continued.’ Why have I been longing for you? Whyhave I been thirsting for you all these days, and just now? (It’s fivedays since I’ve cast anchor here.) Because it’s only to you I can telleverything; because I must, because I need you, because to‐morrow I shallfly from the clouds, because to‐morrow life is ending and beginning. Haveyou ever felt, have you ever dreamt of falling down a precipice into apit? That’s just how I’m falling, but not in a dream. And I’m not afraid,and don’t you be afraid. At least, I am afraid, but I enjoy it. It’s notenjoyment though, but ecstasy. Damn it all, whatever it is! A strongspirit, a weak spirit, a womanish spirit—whatever it is! Let us praisenature: you see what sunshine, how clear the sky is, the leaves are allgreen, it’s still summer; four o’clock in the afternoon and the stillness!Where were you going?”
“I was going to father’s, but I meant to go to Katerina Ivanovna’s first.”
“To her, and to father! Oo! what a coincidence! Why was I waiting for you?Hungering and thirsting for you in every cranny of my soul and even in myribs? Why, to send you to father and to her, Katerina Ivanovna, so as tohave done with her and with father. To send an angel. I might have sentany one, but I wanted to send an angel. And here you are on your way tosee father and her.”
“Did you really mean to send me?” cried Alyosha with a distressedexpression.
“Stay! You knew it! And I see you understand it all at once. But be quiet,be quiet for a time. Don’t be sorry, and don’t cry.”
Dmitri stood up, thought a moment, and put his finger to his forehead.
“She’s asked you, written to you a letter or something, that’s why you’regoing to her? You wouldn’t be going except for that?”
“Here is her note.” Alyosha took it out of his pocket. Mitya lookedthrough it quickly.
“And you were going the back‐way! Oh, gods, I thank you for sending him bythe back‐way, and he came to me like the golden fish to the silly oldfishermen in the fable! Listen, Alyosha, listen, brother! Now I mean totell you everything, for I must tell some one. An angel in heaven I’vetold already; but I want to tell an angel on earth. You are an angel onearth. You will hear and judge and forgive. And that’s what I need, thatsome one above me should forgive. Listen! If two people break away fromeverything on earth and fly off into the unknown, or at least one of them,and before flying off or going to ruin he comes to some one else and says,‘Do this for me’—some favor never asked before that could only be asked onone’s deathbed—would that other refuse, if he were a friend or a brother?”
“I will do it, but tell me what it is, and make haste,” said Alyosha.
“Make haste! H’m!... Don’t be in a hurry, Alyosha, you hurry and worryyourself. There’s no need to hurry now. Now the world has taken a newturning. Ah, Alyosha, what a pity you can’t understand ecstasy. But whatam I saying to him? As though you didn’t understand it. What an ass I am!What am I saying? ‘Be noble, O man!’—who says that?”
Alyosha made up his mind to wait. He felt that, perhaps, indeed, his worklay here. Mitya sank into thought for a moment, with his elbow on thetable and his head in his hand. Both were silent.
“Alyosha,” said Mitya, “you’re the only one who won’t laugh. I should liketo begin—my confession—with Schiller’s _Hymn to Joy_, _An die Freude_! Idon’t know German, I only know it’s called that. Don’t think I’m talkingnonsense because I’m drunk. I’m not a bit drunk. Brandy’s all very well,but I need two bottles to make me drunk:

    Silenus with his rosy phiz    Upon his stumbling ass.

But I’ve not drunk a quarter of a bottle, and I’m not Silenus. I’m notSilenus, though I am strong, for I’ve made a decision once for all.Forgive me the pun; you’ll have to forgive me a lot more than puns to‐day.Don’t be uneasy. I’m not spinning it out. I’m talking sense, and I’ll cometo the point in a minute. I won’t keep you in suspense. Stay, how does itgo?”
He raised his head, thought a minute, and began with enthusiasm:

    “Wild and fearful in his cavern     Hid the naked troglodyte,     And the homeless nomad wandered     Laying waste the fertile plain.     Menacing with spear and arrow     In the woods the hunter strayed....     Woe to all poor wretches stranded     On those cruel and hostile shores!
    “From the peak of high Olympus     Came the mother Ceres down,     Seeking in those savage regions     Her lost daughter Proserpine.     But the Goddess found no refuge,     Found no kindly welcome there,     And no temple bearing witness     To the worship of the gods.
    “From the fields and from the vineyards     Came no fruits to deck the feasts,     Only flesh of bloodstained victims     Smoldered on the altar‐fires,     And where’er the grieving goddess     Turns her melancholy gaze,     Sunk in vilest degradation     Man his loathsomeness displays.”

Mitya broke into sobs and seized Alyosha’s hand.
“My dear, my dear, in degradation, in degradation now, too. There’s aterrible amount of suffering for man on earth, a terrible lot of trouble.Don’t think I’m only a brute in an officer’s uniform, wallowing in dirtand drink. I hardly think of anything but of that degraded man—if only I’mnot lying. I pray God I’m not lying and showing off. I think about thatman because I am that man myself.

    Would he purge his soul from vileness    And attain to light and worth,    He must turn and cling for ever    To his ancient Mother Earth.

But the difficulty is how am I to cling for ever to Mother Earth. I don’tkiss her. I don’t cleave to her bosom. Am I to become a peasant or ashepherd? I go on and I don’t know whether I’m going to shame or to lightand joy. That’s the trouble, for everything in the world is a riddle! Andwhenever I’ve happened to sink into the vilest degradation (and it’salways been happening) I always read that poem about Ceres and man. Has itreformed me? Never! For I’m a Karamazov. For when I do leap into the pit,I go headlong with my heels up, and am pleased to be falling in thatdegrading attitude, and pride myself upon it. And in the very depths ofthat degradation I begin a hymn of praise. Let me be accursed. Let me bevile and base, only let me kiss the hem of the veil in which my God isshrouded. Though I may be following the devil, I am Thy son, O Lord, and Ilove Thee, and I feel the joy without which the world cannot stand.

    Joy everlasting fostereth    The soul of all creation,    It is her secret ferment fires    The cup of life with flame.    ’Tis at her beck the grass hath turned    Each blade towards the light    And solar systems have evolved    From chaos and dark night,    Filling the realms of boundless space    Beyond the sage’s sight.    At bounteous Nature’s kindly breast,    All things that breathe drink Joy,    And birds and beasts and creeping things    All follow where She leads.    Her gifts to man are friends in need,    The wreath, the foaming must,    To angels—vision of God’s throne,    To insects—sensual lust.

But enough poetry! I am in tears; let me cry. It may be foolishness thatevery one would laugh at. But you won’t laugh. Your eyes are shining, too.Enough poetry. I want to tell you now about the insects to whom God gave“sensual lust.”

    To insects—sensual lust.

I am that insect, brother, and it is said of me specially. All weKaramazovs are such insects, and, angel as you are, that insect lives inyou, too, and will stir up a tempest in your blood. Tempests, becausesensual lust is a tempest—worse than a tempest! Beauty is a terrible andawful thing! It is terrible because it has not been fathomed and never canbe fathomed, for God sets us nothing but riddles. Here the boundaries meetand all contradictions exist side by side. I am not a cultivated man,brother, but I’ve thought a lot about this. It’s terrible what mysteriesthere are! Too many riddles weigh men down on earth. We must solve them aswe can, and try to keep a dry skin in the water. Beauty! I can’t endurethe thought that a man of lofty mind and heart begins with the ideal ofthe Madonna and ends with the ideal of Sodom. What’s still more awful isthat a man with the ideal of Sodom in his soul does not renounce the idealof the Madonna, and his heart may be on fire with that ideal, genuinely onfire, just as in his days of youth and innocence. Yes, man is broad, toobroad, indeed. I’d have him narrower. The devil only knows what to make ofit! What to the mind is shameful is beauty and nothing else to the heart.Is there beauty in Sodom? Believe me, that for the immense mass of mankindbeauty is found in Sodom. Did you know that secret? The awful thing isthat beauty is mysterious as well as terrible. God and the devil arefighting there and the battlefield is the heart of man. But a man alwaystalks of his own ache. Listen, now to come to facts.”


Chapter IV. The Confession Of A Passionate Heart—In Anecdote

“I was leading a wild life then. Father said just now that I spent severalthousand roubles in seducing young girls. That’s a swinish invention, andthere was nothing of the sort. And if there was, I didn’t need moneysimply for _that_. With me money is an accessory, the overflow of myheart, the framework. To‐day she would be my lady, to‐morrow a wench outof the streets in her place. I entertained them both. I threw away moneyby the handful on music, rioting, and gypsies. Sometimes I gave it to theladies, too, for they’ll take it greedily, that must be admitted, and bepleased and thankful for it. Ladies used to be fond of me: not all ofthem, but it happened, it happened. But I always liked side‐paths, littledark back‐alleys behind the main road—there one finds adventures andsurprises, and precious metal in the dirt. I am speaking figuratively,brother. In the town I was in, there were no such back‐alleys in theliteral sense, but morally there were. If you were like me, you’d knowwhat that means. I loved vice, I loved the ignominy of vice. I lovedcruelty; am I not a bug, am I not a noxious insect? In fact a Karamazov!Once we went, a whole lot of us, for a picnic, in seven sledges. It wasdark, it was winter, and I began squeezing a girl’s hand, and forced herto kiss me. She was the daughter of an official, a sweet, gentle,submissive creature. She allowed me, she allowed me much in the dark. Shethought, poor thing, that I should come next day to make her an offer (Iwas looked upon as a good match, too). But I didn’t say a word to her forfive months. I used to see her in a corner at dances (we were alwayshaving dances), her eyes watching me. I saw how they glowed with fire—afire of gentle indignation. This game only tickled that insect lust Icherished in my soul. Five months later she married an official and leftthe town, still angry, and still, perhaps, in love with me. Now they livehappily. Observe that I told no one. I didn’t boast of it. Though I’m fullof low desires, and love what’s low, I’m not dishonorable. You’reblushing; your eyes flashed. Enough of this filth with you. And all thiswas nothing much—wayside blossoms _à la_ Paul de Kock—though the cruelinsect had already grown strong in my soul. I’ve a perfect album ofreminiscences, brother. God bless them, the darlings. I tried to break itoff without quarreling. And I never gave them away. I never bragged of oneof them. But that’s enough. You can’t suppose I brought you here simply totalk of such nonsense. No, I’m going to tell you something more curious;and don’t be surprised that I’m glad to tell you, instead of beingashamed.”
“You say that because I blushed,” Alyosha said suddenly. “I wasn’tblushing at what you were saying or at what you’ve done. I blushed becauseI am the same as you are.”
“You? Come, that’s going a little too far!”
“No, it’s not too far,” said Alyosha warmly (obviously the idea was not anew one). “The ladder’s the same. I’m at the bottom step, and you’reabove, somewhere about the thirteenth. That’s how I see it. But it’s allthe same. Absolutely the same in kind. Any one on the bottom step is boundto go up to the top one.”
“Then one ought not to step on at all.”
“Any one who can help it had better not.”
“But can you?”
“I think not.”
“Hush, Alyosha, hush, darling! I could kiss your hand, you touch me so.That rogue Grushenka has an eye for men. She told me once that she’ddevour you one day. There, there, I won’t! From this field of corruptionfouled by flies, let’s pass to my tragedy, also befouled by flies, that isby every sort of vileness. Although the old man told lies about myseducing innocence, there really was something of the sort in my tragedy,though it was only once, and then it did not come off. The old man who hasreproached me with what never happened does not even know of this fact; Inever told any one about it. You’re the first, except Ivan, of course—Ivanknows everything. He knew about it long before you. But Ivan’s a tomb.”
“Ivan’s a tomb?”
“Yes.”
Alyosha listened with great attention.
“I was lieutenant in a line regiment, but still I was under supervision,like a kind of convict. Yet I was awfully well received in the littletown. I spent money right and left. I was thought to be rich; I thought somyself. But I must have pleased them in other ways as well. Although theyshook their heads over me, they liked me. My colonel, who was an old man,took a sudden dislike to me. He was always down upon me, but I hadpowerful friends, and, moreover, all the town was on my side, so hecouldn’t do me much harm. I was in fault myself for refusing to treat himwith proper respect. I was proud. This obstinate old fellow, who wasreally a very good sort, kind‐hearted and hospitable, had had two wives,both dead. His first wife, who was of a humble family, left a daughter asunpretentious as herself. She was a young woman of four and twenty when Iwas there, and was living with her father and an aunt, her mother’ssister. The aunt was simple and illiterate; the niece was simple butlively. I like to say nice things about people. I never knew a woman ofmore charming character than Agafya—fancy, her name was Agafya Ivanovna!And she wasn’t bad‐looking either, in the Russian style: tall, stout, witha full figure, and beautiful eyes, though a rather coarse face. She hadnot married, although she had had two suitors. She refused them, but wasas cheerful as ever. I was intimate with her, not in ‘that’ way, it waspure friendship. I have often been friendly with women quite innocently. Iused to talk to her with shocking frankness, and she only laughed. Manywomen like such freedom, and she was a girl too, which made it veryamusing. Another thing, one could never think of her as a young lady. Sheand her aunt lived in her father’s house with a sort of voluntaryhumility, not putting themselves on an equality with other people. She wasa general favorite, and of use to every one, for she was a cleverdressmaker. She had a talent for it. She gave her services freely withoutasking for payment, but if any one offered her payment, she didn’t refuse.The colonel, of course, was a very different matter. He was one of thechief personages in the district. He kept open house, entertained thewhole town, gave suppers and dances. At the time I arrived and joined thebattalion, all the town was talking of the expected return of thecolonel’s second daughter, a great beauty, who had just left a fashionableschool in the capital. This second daughter is Katerina Ivanovna, and shewas the child of the second wife, who belonged to a distinguishedgeneral’s family; although, as I learnt on good authority, she too broughtthe colonel no money. She had connections, and that was all. There mayhave been expectations, but they had come to nothing.
“Yet, when the young lady came from boarding‐school on a visit, the wholetown revived. Our most distinguished ladies—two ‘Excellencies’ and acolonel’s wife—and all the rest following their lead, at once took her upand gave entertainments in her honor. She was the belle of the balls andpicnics, and they got up _tableaux vivants_ in aid of distressedgovernesses. I took no notice, I went on as wildly as before, and one ofmy exploits at the time set all the town talking. I saw her eyes taking mymeasure one evening at the battery commander’s, but I didn’t go up to her,as though I disdained her acquaintance. I did go up and speak to her at anevening party not long after. She scarcely looked at me, and compressedher lips scornfully. ‘Wait a bit. I’ll have my revenge,’ thought I. Ibehaved like an awful fool on many occasions at that time, and I wasconscious of it myself. What made it worse was that I felt that ‘Katenka’was not an innocent boarding‐school miss, but a person of character, proudand really high‐principled; above all, she had education and intellect,and I had neither. You think I meant to make her an offer? No, I simplywanted to revenge myself, because I was such a hero and she didn’t seem tofeel it.
“Meanwhile, I spent my time in drink and riot, till the lieutenant‐colonelput me under arrest for three days. Just at that time father sent me sixthousand roubles in return for my sending him a deed giving up all claimsupon him—settling our accounts, so to speak, and saying that I wouldn’texpect anything more. I didn’t understand a word of it at the time. UntilI came here, Alyosha, till the last few days, indeed, perhaps even now, Ihaven’t been able to make head or tail of my money affairs with father.But never mind that, we’ll talk of it later.
“Just as I received the money, I got a letter from a friend telling mesomething that interested me immensely. The authorities, I learnt, weredissatisfied with our lieutenant‐colonel. He was suspected ofirregularities; in fact, his enemies were preparing a surprise for him.And then the commander of the division arrived, and kicked up the devil ofa shindy. Shortly afterwards he was ordered to retire. I won’t tell youhow it all happened. He had enemies certainly. Suddenly there was a markedcoolness in the town towards him and all his family. His friends allturned their backs on him. Then I took my first step. I met AgafyaIvanovna, with whom I’d always kept up a friendship, and said, ‘Do youknow there’s a deficit of 4,500 roubles of government money in yourfather’s accounts?’
“ ‘What do you mean? What makes you say so? The general was here not longago, and everything was all right.’
“ ‘Then it was, but now it isn’t.’
“She was terribly scared.
“ ‘Don’t frighten me!’ she said. ‘Who told you so?’
“ ‘Don’t be uneasy,’ I said, ‘I won’t tell any one. You know I’m as silentas the tomb. I only wanted, in view of “possibilities,” to add, that whenthey demand that 4,500 roubles from your father, and he can’t produce it,he’ll be tried, and made to serve as a common soldier in his old age,unless you like to send me your young lady secretly. I’ve just had moneypaid me. I’ll give her four thousand, if you like, and keep the secretreligiously.’
“ ‘Ah, you scoundrel!’—that’s what she said. ‘You wicked scoundrel! Howdare you!’
“She went away furiously indignant, while I shouted after her once morethat the secret should be kept sacred. Those two simple creatures, Agafyaand her aunt, I may as well say at once, behaved like perfect angels allthrough this business. They genuinely adored their ‘Katya,’ thought herfar above them, and waited on her, hand and foot. But Agafya told her ofour conversation. I found that out afterwards. She didn’t keep it back,and of course that was all I wanted.
“Suddenly the new major arrived to take command of the battalion. The oldlieutenant‐colonel was taken ill at once, couldn’t leave his room for twodays, and didn’t hand over the government money. Dr. Kravchenko declaredthat he really was ill. But I knew for a fact, and had known for a longtime, that for the last four years the money had never been in his handsexcept when the Commander made his visits of inspection. He used to lendit to a trustworthy person, a merchant of our town called Trifonov, an oldwidower, with a big beard and gold‐rimmed spectacles. He used to go to thefair, do a profitable business with the money, and return the whole sum tothe colonel, bringing with it a present from the fair, as well as intereston the loan. But this time (I heard all about it quite by chance fromTrifonov’s son and heir, a driveling youth and one of the most vicious inthe world)—this time, I say, Trifonov brought nothing back from the fair.The lieutenant‐colonel flew to him. ‘I’ve never received any money fromyou, and couldn’t possibly have received any.’ That was all the answer hegot. So now our lieutenant‐colonel is confined to the house, with a towelround his head, while they’re all three busy putting ice on it. All atonce an orderly arrives on the scene with the book and the order to ‘handover the battalion money immediately, within two hours.’ He signed thebook (I saw the signature in the book afterwards), stood up, saying hewould put on his uniform, ran to his bedroom, loaded his double‐barreledgun with a service bullet, took the boot off his right foot, fixed the gunagainst his chest, and began feeling for the trigger with his foot. ButAgafya, remembering what I had told her, had her suspicions. She stole upand peeped into the room just in time. She rushed in, flung herself uponhim from behind, threw her arms round him, and the gun went off, hit theceiling, but hurt no one. The others ran in, took away the gun, and heldhim by the arms. I heard all about this afterwards. I was at home, it wasgetting dusk, and I was just preparing to go out. I had dressed, brushedmy hair, scented my handkerchief, and taken up my cap, when suddenly thedoor opened, and facing me in the room stood Katerina Ivanovna.
“It’s strange how things happen sometimes. No one had seen her in thestreet, so that no one knew of it in the town. I lodged with two decrepitold ladies, who looked after me. They were most obliging old things, readyto do anything for me, and at my request were as silent afterwards as twocast‐iron posts. Of course I grasped the position at once. She walked inand looked straight at me, her dark eyes determined, even defiant, but onher lips and round her mouth I saw uncertainty.
“ ‘My sister told me,’ she began, ‘that you would give me 4,500 roubles ifI came to you for it—myself. I have come ... give me the money!’
“She couldn’t keep it up. She was breathless, frightened, her voice failedher, and the corners of her mouth and the lines round it quivered.Alyosha, are you listening, or are you asleep?”
“Mitya, I know you will tell the whole truth,” said Alyosha in agitation.
“I am telling it. If I tell the whole truth just as it happened I shan’tspare myself. My first idea was a—Karamazov one. Once I was bitten by acentipede, brother, and laid up a fortnight with fever from it. Well, Ifelt a centipede biting at my heart then—a noxious insect, you understand?I looked her up and down. You’ve seen her? She’s a beauty. But she wasbeautiful in another way then. At that moment she was beautiful becauseshe was noble, and I was a scoundrel; she in all the grandeur of hergenerosity and sacrifice for her father, and I—a bug! And, scoundrel as Iwas, she was altogether at my mercy, body and soul. She was hemmed in. Itell you frankly, that thought, that venomous thought, so possessed myheart that it almost swooned with suspense. It seemed as if there could beno resisting it; as though I should act like a bug, like a venomousspider, without a spark of pity. I could scarcely breathe. Understand, Ishould have gone next day to ask for her hand, so that it might endhonorably, so to speak, and that nobody would or could know. For thoughI’m a man of base desires, I’m honest. And at that very second some voiceseemed to whisper in my ear, ‘But when you come to‐morrow to make yourproposal, that girl won’t even see you; she’ll order her coachman to kickyou out of the yard. “Publish it through all the town,” she would say,“I’m not afraid of you.” ’ I looked at the young lady, my voice had notdeceived me. That is how it would be, not a doubt of it. I could see fromher face now that I should be turned out of the house. My spite wasroused. I longed to play her the nastiest swinish cad’s trick: to look ather with a sneer, and on the spot where she stood before me to stun herwith a tone of voice that only a shopman could use.
“ ‘Four thousand! What do you mean? I was joking. You’ve been countingyour chickens too easily, madam. Two hundred, if you like, with all myheart. But four thousand is not a sum to throw away on such frivolity.You’ve put yourself out to no purpose.’
“I should have lost the game, of course. She’d have run away. But it wouldhave been an infernal revenge. It would have been worth it all. I’d havehowled with regret all the rest of my life, only to have played thattrick. Would you believe it, it has never happened to me with any otherwoman, not one, to look at her at such a moment with hatred. But, on myoath, I looked at her for three seconds, or five perhaps, with fearfulhatred—that hate which is only a hair’s‐breadth from love, from themaddest love!
“I went to the window, put my forehead against the frozen pane, and Iremember the ice burnt my forehead like fire. I did not keep her long,don’t be afraid. I turned round, went up to the table, opened the drawerand took out a banknote for five thousand roubles (it was lying in aFrench dictionary). Then I showed it her in silence, folded it, handed itto her, opened the door into the passage, and, stepping back, made her adeep bow, a most respectful, a most impressive bow, believe me! Sheshuddered all over, gazed at me for a second, turned horribly pale—whiteas a sheet, in fact—and all at once, not impetuously but softly, gently,bowed down to my feet—not a boarding‐school curtsey, but a Russian bow,with her forehead to the floor. She jumped up and ran away. I was wearingmy sword. I drew it and nearly stabbed myself with it on the spot; why, Idon’t know. It would have been frightfully stupid, of course. I suppose itwas from delight. Can you understand that one might kill oneself fromdelight? But I didn’t stab myself. I only kissed my sword and put it backin the scabbard—which there was no need to have told you, by the way. AndI fancy that in telling you about my inner conflict I have laid it onrather thick to glorify myself. But let it pass, and to hell with all whopry into the human heart! Well, so much for that ‘adventure’ with KaterinaIvanovna. So now Ivan knows of it, and you—no one else.”
Dmitri got up, took a step or two in his excitement, pulled out hishandkerchief and mopped his forehead, then sat down again, not in the sameplace as before, but on the opposite side, so that Alyosha had to turnquite round to face him.


Chapter V. The Confession Of A Passionate Heart—"Heels Up"

“Now,” said Alyosha, “I understand the first half.”
“You understand the first half. That half is a drama, and it was playedout there. The second half is a tragedy, and it is being acted here.”
“And I understand nothing of that second half so far,” said Alyosha.
“And I? Do you suppose I understand it?”
“Stop, Dmitri. There’s one important question. Tell me, you werebetrothed, you are betrothed still?”
“We weren’t betrothed at once, not for three months after that adventure.The next day I told myself that the incident was closed, concluded, thatthere would be no sequel. It seemed to me caddish to make her an offer. Onher side she gave no sign of life for the six weeks that she remained inthe town; except, indeed, for one action. The day after her visit themaid‐servant slipped round with an envelope addressed to me. I tore itopen: it contained the change out of the banknote. Only four thousand fivehundred roubles was needed, but there was a discount of about two hundredon changing it. She only sent me about two hundred and sixty. I don’tremember exactly, but not a note, not a word of explanation. I searchedthe packet for a pencil mark—n‐nothing! Well, I spent the rest of themoney on such an orgy that the new major was obliged to reprimand me.
“Well, the lieutenant‐colonel produced the battalion money, to theastonishment of every one, for nobody believed that he had the moneyuntouched. He’d no sooner paid it than he fell ill, took to his bed, and,three weeks later, softening of the brain set in, and he died five daysafterwards. He was buried with military honors, for he had not had time toreceive his discharge. Ten days after his funeral, Katerina Ivanovna, withher aunt and sister, went to Moscow. And, behold, on the very day theywent away (I hadn’t seen them, didn’t see them off or take leave) Ireceived a tiny note, a sheet of thin blue paper, and on it only one linein pencil: ‘I will write to you. Wait. K.’ And that was all.
“I’ll explain the rest now, in two words. In Moscow their fortunes changedwith the swiftness of lightning and the unexpectedness of an Arabianfairy‐tale. That general’s widow, their nearest relation, suddenly lostthe two nieces who were her heiresses and next‐of‐kin—both died in thesame week of small‐pox. The old lady, prostrated with grief, welcomedKatya as a daughter, as her one hope, clutched at her, altered her will inKatya’s favor. But that concerned the future. Meanwhile she gave her, forpresent use, eighty thousand roubles, as a marriage portion, to do whatshe liked with. She was an hysterical woman. I saw something of her inMoscow, later.
“Well, suddenly I received by post four thousand five hundred roubles. Iwas speechless with surprise, as you may suppose. Three days later camethe promised letter. I have it with me now. You must read it. She offersto be my wife, offers herself to me. ‘I love you madly,’ she says, ‘evenif you don’t love me, never mind. Be my husband. Don’t be afraid. I won’thamper you in any way. I will be your chattel. I will be the carpet underyour feet. I want to love you for ever. I want to save you from yourself.’Alyosha, I am not worthy to repeat those lines in my vulgar words and inmy vulgar tone, my everlastingly vulgar tone, that I can never cure myselfof. That letter stabs me even now. Do you think I don’t mind—that I don’tmind still? I wrote her an answer at once, as it was impossible for me togo to Moscow. I wrote to her with tears. One thing I shall be ashamed offor ever. I referred to her being rich and having a dowry while I was onlya stuck‐up beggar! I mentioned money! I ought to have borne it in silence,but it slipped from my pen. Then I wrote at once to Ivan, and told him allI could about it in a letter of six pages, and sent him to her. Why do youlook like that? Why are you staring at me? Yes, Ivan fell in love withher; he’s in love with her still. I know that. I did a stupid thing, inthe world’s opinion; but perhaps that one stupid thing may be the savingof us all now. Oo! Don’t you see what a lot she thinks of Ivan, how sherespects him? When she compares us, do you suppose she can love a man likeme, especially after all that has happened here?”
“But I am convinced that she does love a man like you, and not a man likehim.”
“She loves her own _virtue_, not me.” The words broke involuntarily, andalmost malignantly, from Dmitri. He laughed, but a minute later his eyesgleamed, he flushed crimson and struck the table violently with his fist.
“I swear, Alyosha,” he cried, with intense and genuine anger at himself;“you may not believe me, but as God is holy, and as Christ is God, I swearthat though I smiled at her lofty sentiments just now, I know that I am amillion times baser in soul than she, and that these lofty sentiments ofhers are as sincere as a heavenly angel’s. That’s the tragedy of it—that Iknow that for certain. What if any one does show off a bit? Don’t I do itmyself? And yet I’m sincere, I’m sincere. As for Ivan, I can understandhow he must be cursing nature now—with his intellect, too! To see thepreference given—to whom, to what? To a monster who, though he isbetrothed and all eyes are fixed on him, can’t restrain hisdebaucheries—and before the very eyes of his betrothed! And a man like meis preferred, while he is rejected. And why? Because a girl wants tosacrifice her life and destiny out of gratitude. It’s ridiculous! I’venever said a word of this to Ivan, and Ivan of course has never dropped ahint of the sort to me. But destiny will be accomplished, and the best manwill hold his ground while the undeserving one will vanish into his back‐alley for ever—his filthy back‐alley, his beloved back‐alley, where he isat home and where he will sink in filth and stench at his own free willand with enjoyment. I’ve been talking foolishly. I’ve no words left. I usethem at random, but it will be as I have said. I shall drown in the back‐alley, and she will marry Ivan.”
“Stop, Dmitri,” Alyosha interrupted again with great anxiety. “There’s onething you haven’t made clear yet: you are still betrothed all the same,aren’t you? How can you break off the engagement if she, your betrothed,doesn’t want to?”
“Yes, formally and solemnly betrothed. It was all done on my arrival inMoscow, with great ceremony, with ikons, all in fine style. The general’swife blessed us, and—would you believe it?—congratulated Katya. ‘You’vemade a good choice,’ she said, ‘I see right through him.’ And—would youbelieve it?—she didn’t like Ivan, and hardly greeted him. I had a lot oftalk with Katya in Moscow. I told her about myself—sincerely, honorably.She listened to everything.

    There was sweet confusion,    There were tender words.

Though there were proud words, too. She wrung out of me a mighty promiseto reform. I gave my promise, and here—”
“What?”
“Why, I called to you and brought you out here to‐day, this veryday—remember it—to send you—this very day again—to Katerina Ivanovna,and—”
“What?”
“To tell her that I shall never come to see her again. Say, ‘He sends youhis compliments.’ ”
“But is that possible?”
“That’s just the reason I’m sending you, in my place, because it’simpossible. And, how could I tell her myself?”
“And where are you going?”
“To the back‐alley.”
“To Grushenka, then!” Alyosha exclaimed mournfully, clasping his hands.“Can Rakitin really have told the truth? I thought that you had justvisited her, and that was all.”
“Can a betrothed man pay such visits? Is such a thing possible and withsuch a betrothed, and before the eyes of all the world? Confound it, Ihave some honor! As soon as I began visiting Grushenka, I ceased to bebetrothed, and to be an honest man. I understand that. Why do you look atme? You see, I went in the first place to beat her. I had heard, and Iknow for a fact now, that that captain, father’s agent, had givenGrushenka an I.O.U. of mine for her to sue me for payment, so as to put anend to me. They wanted to scare me. I went to beat her. I had had aglimpse of her before. She doesn’t strike one at first sight. I knew abouther old merchant, who’s lying ill now, paralyzed; but he’s leaving her adecent little sum. I knew, too, that she was fond of money, that shehoarded it, and lent it at a wicked rate of interest, that she’s amerciless cheat and swindler. I went to beat her, and I stayed. The stormbroke—it struck me down like the plague. I’m plague‐stricken still, and Iknow that everything is over, that there will never be anything more forme. The cycle of the ages is accomplished. That’s my position. And thoughI’m a beggar, as fate would have it, I had three thousand just then in mypocket. I drove with Grushenka to Mokroe, a place twenty‐five versts fromhere. I got gypsies there and champagne and made all the peasants theredrunk on it, and all the women and girls. I sent the thousands flying. Inthree days’ time I was stripped bare, but a hero. Do you suppose the herohad gained his end? Not a sign of it from her. I tell you that rogue,Grushenka, has a supple curve all over her body. You can see it in herlittle foot, even in her little toe. I saw it, and kissed it, but that wasall, I swear! ‘I’ll marry you if you like,’ she said, ‘you’re a beggar,you know. Say that you won’t beat me, and will let me do anything Ichoose, and perhaps I will marry you.’ She laughed, and she’s laughingstill!”
Dmitri leapt up with a sort of fury. He seemed all at once as though hewere drunk. His eyes became suddenly bloodshot.
“And do you really mean to marry her?”
“At once, if she will. And if she won’t, I shall stay all the same. I’llbe the porter at her gate. Alyosha!” he cried. He stopped short beforehim, and taking him by the shoulders began shaking him violently. “Do youknow, you innocent boy, that this is all delirium, senseless delirium, forthere’s a tragedy here. Let me tell you, Alexey, that I may be a low man,with low and degraded passions, but a thief and a pickpocket DmitriKaramazov never can be. Well, then; let me tell you that I am a thief anda pickpocket. That very morning, just before I went to beat Grushenka,Katerina Ivanovna sent for me, and in strict secrecy (why I don’t know, Isuppose she had some reason) asked me to go to the chief town of theprovince and to post three thousand roubles to Agafya Ivanovna in Moscow,so that nothing should be known of it in the town here. So I had thatthree thousand roubles in my pocket when I went to see Grushenka, and itwas that money we spent at Mokroe. Afterwards I pretended I had been tothe town, but did not show her the post office receipt. I said I had sentthe money and would bring the receipt, and so far I haven’t brought it.I’ve forgotten it. Now what do you think you’re going to her to‐day tosay? ‘He sends his compliments,’ and she’ll ask you, ‘What about themoney?’ You might still have said to her, ‘He’s a degraded sensualist, anda low creature, with uncontrolled passions. He didn’t send your moneythen, but wasted it, because, like a low brute, he couldn’t controlhimself.’ But still you might have added, ‘He isn’t a thief though. Hereis your three thousand; he sends it back. Send it yourself to AgafyaIvanovna. But he told me to say “he sends his compliments.” ’ But, as itis, she will ask, ‘But where is the money?’ ”
“Mitya, you are unhappy, yes! But not as unhappy as you think. Don’t worryyourself to death with despair.”
“What, do you suppose I’d shoot myself because I can’t get three thousandto pay back? That’s just it. I shan’t shoot myself. I haven’t the strengthnow. Afterwards, perhaps. But now I’m going to Grushenka. I don’t carewhat happens.”
“And what then?”
“I’ll be her husband if she deigns to have me, and when lovers come, I’llgo into the next room. I’ll clean her friends’ goloshes, blow up theirsamovar, run their errands.”
“Katerina Ivanovna will understand it all,” Alyosha said solemnly. “She’llunderstand how great this trouble is and will forgive. She has a loftymind, and no one could be more unhappy than you. She’ll see that forherself.”
“She won’t forgive everything,” said Dmitri, with a grin. “There’ssomething in it, brother, that no woman could forgive. Do you know whatwould be the best thing to do?”
“What?”
“Pay back the three thousand.”
“Where can we get it from? I say, I have two thousand. Ivan will give youanother thousand—that makes three. Take it and pay it back.”
“And when would you get it, your three thousand? You’re not of age,besides, and you must—you absolutely must—take my farewell to her to‐day,with the money or without it, for I can’t drag on any longer, things havecome to such a pass. To‐morrow is too late. I shall send you to father.”
“To father?”
“Yes, to father first. Ask him for three thousand.”
“But, Mitya, he won’t give it.”
“As though he would! I know he won’t. Do you know the meaning of despair,Alexey?”
“Yes.”
“Listen. Legally he owes me nothing. I’ve had it all from him, I knowthat. But morally he owes me something, doesn’t he? You know he startedwith twenty‐eight thousand of my mother’s money and made a hundredthousand with it. Let him give me back only three out of the twenty‐eightthousand, and he’ll draw my soul out of hell, and it will atone for manyof his sins. For that three thousand—I give you my solemn word—I’ll makean end of everything, and he shall hear nothing more of me. For the lasttime I give him the chance to be a father. Tell him God Himself sends himthis chance.”
“Mitya, he won’t give it for anything.”
“I know he won’t. I know it perfectly well. Now, especially. That’s notall. I know something more. Now, only a few days ago, perhaps onlyyesterday he found out for the first time _in earnest_ (underline _inearnest_) that Grushenka is really perhaps not joking, and really means tomarry me. He knows her nature; he knows the cat. And do you suppose he’sgoing to give me money to help to bring that about when he’s crazy abouther himself? And that’s not all, either. I can tell you more than that. Iknow that for the last five days he has had three thousand drawn out ofthe bank, changed into notes of a hundred roubles, packed into a largeenvelope, sealed with five seals, and tied across with red tape. You seehow well I know all about it! On the envelope is written: ‘To my angel,Grushenka, when she will come to me.’ He scrawled it himself in silenceand in secret, and no one knows that the money’s there except the valet,Smerdyakov, whom he trusts like himself. So now he has been expectingGrushenka for the last three or four days; he hopes she’ll come for themoney. He has sent her word of it, and she has sent him word that perhapsshe’ll come. And if she does go to the old man, can I marry her afterthat? You understand now why I’m here in secret and what I’m on the watchfor.”
“For her?”
“Yes, for her. Foma has a room in the house of these sluts here. Fomacomes from our parts; he was a soldier in our regiment. He does jobs forthem. He’s watchman at night and goes grouse‐shooting in the day‐time; andthat’s how he lives. I’ve established myself in his room. Neither he northe women of the house know the secret—that is, that I am on the watchhere.”
“No one but Smerdyakov knows, then?”
“No one else. He will let me know if she goes to the old man.”
“It was he told you about the money, then?”
“Yes. It’s a dead secret. Even Ivan doesn’t know about the money, oranything. The old man is sending Ivan to Tchermashnya on a two or threedays’ journey. A purchaser has turned up for the copse: he’ll give eightthousand for the timber. So the old man keeps asking Ivan to help him bygoing to arrange it. It will take him two or three days. That’s what theold man wants, so that Grushenka can come while he’s away.”
“Then he’s expecting Grushenka to‐day?”
“No, she won’t come to‐day; there are signs. She’s certain not to come,”cried Mitya suddenly. “Smerdyakov thinks so, too. Father’s drinking now.He’s sitting at table with Ivan. Go to him, Alyosha, and ask for the threethousand.”
“Mitya, dear, what’s the matter with you?” cried Alyosha, jumping up fromhis place, and looking keenly at his brother’s frenzied face. For onemoment the thought struck him that Dmitri was mad.
“What is it? I’m not insane,” said Dmitri, looking intently and earnestlyat him. “No fear. I am sending you to father, and I know what I’m saying.I believe in miracles.”
“In miracles?”
“In a miracle of Divine Providence. God knows my heart. He sees mydespair. He sees the whole picture. Surely He won’t let something awfulhappen. Alyosha, I believe in miracles. Go!”
“I am going. Tell me, will you wait for me here?”
“Yes. I know it will take some time. You can’t go at him point blank. He’sdrunk now. I’ll wait three hours—four, five, six, seven. Only remember youmust go to Katerina Ivanovna to‐day, if it has to be at midnight, _withthe money or without the money_, and say, ‘He sends his compliments toyou.’ I want you to say that verse to her: ‘He sends his compliments toyou.’ ”
“Mitya! And what if Grushenka comes to‐day—if not to‐day, to‐morrow, orthe next day?”
“Grushenka? I shall see her. I shall rush out and prevent it.”
“And if—”
“If there’s an if, it will be murder. I couldn’t endure it.”
“Who will be murdered?”
“The old man. I shan’t kill her.”
“Brother, what are you saying?”
“Oh, I don’t know.... I don’t know. Perhaps I shan’t kill, and perhaps Ishall. I’m afraid that he will suddenly become so loathsome to me with hisface at that moment. I hate his ugly throat, his nose, his eyes, hisshameless snigger. I feel a physical repulsion. That’s what I’m afraid of.That’s what may be too much for me.”
“I’ll go, Mitya. I believe that God will order things for the best, thatnothing awful may happen.”
“And I will sit and wait for the miracle. And if it doesn’t come to pass—”
Alyosha went thoughtfully towards his father’s house.


Chapter VI. Smerdyakov

He did in fact find his father still at table. Though there was a dining‐room in the house, the table was laid as usual in the drawing‐room, whichwas the largest room, and furnished with old‐fashioned ostentation. Thefurniture was white and very old, upholstered in old, red, silky material.In the spaces between the windows there were mirrors in elaborate whiteand gilt frames, of old‐fashioned carving. On the walls, covered withwhite paper, which was torn in many places, there hung two largeportraits—one of some prince who had been governor of the district thirtyyears before, and the other of some bishop, also long since dead. In thecorner opposite the door there were several ikons, before which a lamp waslighted at nightfall ... not so much for devotional purposes as to lightthe room. Fyodor Pavlovitch used to go to bed very late, at three or fouro’clock in the morning, and would wander about the room at night or sit inan arm‐chair, thinking. This had become a habit with him. He often sleptquite alone in the house, sending his servants to the lodge; but usuallySmerdyakov remained, sleeping on a bench in the hall.
When Alyosha came in, dinner was over, but coffee and preserves had beenserved. Fyodor Pavlovitch liked sweet things with brandy after dinner.Ivan was also at table, sipping coffee. The servants, Grigory andSmerdyakov, were standing by. Both the gentlemen and the servants seemedin singularly good spirits. Fyodor Pavlovitch was roaring with laughter.Before he entered the room, Alyosha heard the shrill laugh he knew sowell, and could tell from the sound of it that his father had only reachedthe good‐humored stage, and was far from being completely drunk.
“Here he is! Here he is!” yelled Fyodor Pavlovitch, highly delighted atseeing Alyosha. “Join us. Sit down. Coffee is a lenten dish, but it’s hotand good. I don’t offer you brandy, you’re keeping the fast. But would youlike some? No; I’d better give you some of our famous liqueur. Smerdyakov,go to the cupboard, the second shelf on the right. Here are the keys. Looksharp!”
Alyosha began refusing the liqueur.
“Never mind. If you won’t have it, we will,” said Fyodor Pavlovitch,beaming. “But stay—have you dined?”
“Yes,” answered Alyosha, who had in truth only eaten a piece of bread anddrunk a glass of kvas in the Father Superior’s kitchen. “Though I shouldbe pleased to have some hot coffee.”
“Bravo, my darling! He’ll have some coffee. Does it want warming? No, it’sboiling. It’s capital coffee: Smerdyakov’s making. My Smerdyakov’s anartist at coffee and at fish patties, and at fish soup, too. You must comeone day and have some fish soup. Let me know beforehand.... But, stay;didn’t I tell you this morning to come home with your mattress and pillowand all? Have you brought your mattress? He he he!”
“No, I haven’t,” said Alyosha, smiling, too.
“Ah, but you were frightened, you were frightened this morning, weren’tyou? There, my darling, I couldn’t do anything to vex you. Do you know,Ivan, I can’t resist the way he looks one straight in the face and laughs?It makes me laugh all over. I’m so fond of him. Alyosha, let me give youmy blessing—a father’s blessing.”
Alyosha rose, but Fyodor Pavlovitch had already changed his mind.
“No, no,” he said. “I’ll just make the sign of the cross over you, fornow. Sit still. Now we’ve a treat for you, in your own line, too. It’llmake you laugh. Balaam’s ass has begun talking to us here—and how hetalks! How he talks!”
Balaam’s ass, it appeared, was the valet, Smerdyakov. He was a young manof about four and twenty, remarkably unsociable and taciturn. Not that hewas shy or bashful. On the contrary, he was conceited and seemed todespise everybody.
But we must pause to say a few words about him now. He was brought up byGrigory and Marfa, but the boy grew up “with no sense of gratitude,” asGrigory expressed it; he was an unfriendly boy, and seemed to look at theworld mistrustfully. In his childhood he was very fond of hanging cats,and burying them with great ceremony. He used to dress up in a sheet asthough it were a surplice, and sang, and waved some object over the deadcat as though it were a censer. All this he did on the sly, with thegreatest secrecy. Grigory caught him once at this diversion and gave him asound beating. He shrank into a corner and sulked there for a week. “Hedoesn’t care for you or me, the monster,” Grigory used to say to Marfa,“and he doesn’t care for any one. Are you a human being?” he said,addressing the boy directly. “You’re not a human being. You grew from themildew in the bath‐house. That’s what you are.” Smerdyakov, it appearedafterwards, could never forgive him those words. Grigory taught him toread and write, and when he was twelve years old, began teaching him theScriptures. But this teaching came to nothing. At the second or thirdlesson the boy suddenly grinned.
“What’s that for?” asked Grigory, looking at him threateningly from underhis spectacles.
“Oh, nothing. God created light on the first day, and the sun, moon, andstars on the fourth day. Where did the light come from on the first day?”
Grigory was thunderstruck. The boy looked sarcastically at his teacher.There was something positively condescending in his expression. Grigorycould not restrain himself. “I’ll show you where!” he cried, and gave theboy a violent slap on the cheek. The boy took the slap without a word, butwithdrew into his corner again for some days. A week later he had hisfirst attack of the disease to which he was subject all the rest of hislife—epilepsy. When Fyodor Pavlovitch heard of it, his attitude to the boyseemed changed at once. Till then he had taken no notice of him, though henever scolded him, and always gave him a copeck when he met him.Sometimes, when he was in good humor, he would send the boy somethingsweet from his table. But as soon as he heard of his illness, he showed anactive interest in him, sent for a doctor, and tried remedies, but thedisease turned out to be incurable. The fits occurred, on an average, oncea month, but at various intervals. The fits varied too, in violence: somewere light and some were very severe. Fyodor Pavlovitch strictly forbadeGrigory to use corporal punishment to the boy, and began allowing him tocome upstairs to him. He forbade him to be taught anything whatever for atime, too. One day when the boy was about fifteen, Fyodor Pavlovitchnoticed him lingering by the bookcase, and reading the titles through theglass. Fyodor Pavlovitch had a fair number of books—over a hundred—but noone ever saw him reading. He at once gave Smerdyakov the key of thebookcase. “Come, read. You shall be my librarian. You’ll be better sittingreading than hanging about the courtyard. Come, read this,” and FyodorPavlovitch gave him _Evenings in a Cottage near Dikanka_.
He read a little but didn’t like it. He did not once smile, and ended byfrowning.
“Why? Isn’t it funny?” asked Fyodor Pavlovitch.
Smerdyakov did not speak.
“Answer, stupid!”
“It’s all untrue,” mumbled the boy, with a grin.
“Then go to the devil! You have the soul of a lackey. Stay, here’sSmaragdov’s _Universal History_. That’s all true. Read that.”
But Smerdyakov did not get through ten pages of Smaragdov. He thought itdull. So the bookcase was closed again.
Shortly afterwards Marfa and Grigory reported to Fyodor Pavlovitch thatSmerdyakov was gradually beginning to show an extraordinaryfastidiousness. He would sit before his soup, take up his spoon and lookinto the soup, bend over it, examine it, take a spoonful and hold it tothe light.
“What is it? A beetle?” Grigory would ask.
“A fly, perhaps,” observed Marfa.
The squeamish youth never answered, but he did the same with his bread,his meat, and everything he ate. He would hold a piece on his fork to thelight, scrutinize it microscopically, and only after long deliberationdecide to put it in his mouth.
“Ach! What fine gentlemen’s airs!” Grigory muttered, looking at him.
When Fyodor Pavlovitch heard of this development in Smerdyakov hedetermined to make him his cook, and sent him to Moscow to be trained. Hespent some years there and came back remarkably changed in appearance. Helooked extraordinarily old for his age. His face had grown wrinkled,yellow, and strangely emasculate. In character he seemed almost exactlythe same as before he went away. He was just as unsociable, and showed notthe slightest inclination for any companionship. In Moscow, too, as weheard afterwards, he had always been silent. Moscow itself had littleinterest for him; he saw very little there, and took scarcely any noticeof anything. He went once to the theater, but returned silent anddispleased with it. On the other hand, he came back to us from Moscow welldressed, in a clean coat and clean linen. He brushed his clothes mostscrupulously twice a day invariably, and was very fond of cleaning hissmart calf boots with a special English polish, so that they shone likemirrors. He turned out a first‐rate cook. Fyodor Pavlovitch paid him asalary, almost the whole of which Smerdyakov spent on clothes, pomade,perfumes, and such things. But he seemed to have as much contempt for thefemale sex as for men; he was discreet, almost unapproachable, with them.Fyodor Pavlovitch began to regard him rather differently. His fits werebecoming more frequent, and on the days he was ill Marfa cooked, which didnot suit Fyodor Pavlovitch at all.
“Why are your fits getting worse?” asked Fyodor Pavlovitch, lookingaskance at his new cook. “Would you like to get married? Shall I find youa wife?”
But Smerdyakov turned pale with anger, and made no reply. FyodorPavlovitch left him with an impatient gesture. The great thing was that hehad absolute confidence in his honesty. It happened once, when FyodorPavlovitch was drunk, that he dropped in the muddy courtyard threehundred‐rouble notes which he had only just received. He only missed themnext day, and was just hastening to search his pockets when he saw thenotes lying on the table. Where had they come from? Smerdyakov had pickedthem up and brought them in the day before.
“Well, my lad, I’ve never met any one like you,” Fyodor Pavlovitch saidshortly, and gave him ten roubles. We may add that he not only believed inhis honesty, but had, for some reason, a liking for him, although theyoung man looked as morosely at him as at every one and was always silent.He rarely spoke. If it had occurred to any one to wonder at the time whatthe young man was interested in, and what was in his mind, it would havebeen impossible to tell by looking at him. Yet he used sometimes to stopsuddenly in the house, or even in the yard or street, and would standstill for ten minutes, lost in thought. A physiognomist studying his facewould have said that there was no thought in it, no reflection, but only asort of contemplation. There is a remarkable picture by the painterKramskoy, called “Contemplation.” There is a forest in winter, and on aroadway through the forest, in absolute solitude, stands a peasant in atorn kaftan and bark shoes. He stands, as it were, lost in thought. Yet heis not thinking; he is “contemplating.” If any one touched him he wouldstart and look at one as though awakening and bewildered. It’s true hewould come to himself immediately; but if he were asked what he had beenthinking about, he would remember nothing. Yet probably he has, hiddenwithin himself, the impression which had dominated him during the periodof contemplation. Those impressions are dear to him and no doubt he hoardsthem imperceptibly, and even unconsciously. How and why, of course, hedoes not know either. He may suddenly, after hoarding impressions for manyyears, abandon everything and go off to Jerusalem on a pilgrimage for hissoul’s salvation, or perhaps he will suddenly set fire to his nativevillage, and perhaps do both. There are a good many “contemplatives” amongthe peasantry. Well, Smerdyakov was probably one of them, and he probablywas greedily hoarding up his impressions, hardly knowing why.


Chapter VII. The Controversy

But Balaam’s ass had suddenly spoken. The subject was a strange one.Grigory had gone in the morning to make purchases, and had heard from theshopkeeper Lukyanov the story of a Russian soldier which had appeared inthe newspaper of that day. This soldier had been taken prisoner in someremote part of Asia, and was threatened with an immediate agonizing deathif he did not renounce Christianity and follow Islam. He refused to denyhis faith, and was tortured, flayed alive, and died, praising andglorifying Christ. Grigory had related the story at table. FyodorPavlovitch always liked, over the dessert after dinner, to laugh and talk,if only with Grigory. This afternoon he was in a particularly good‐humoredand expansive mood. Sipping his brandy and listening to the story, heobserved that they ought to make a saint of a soldier like that, and totake his skin to some monastery. “That would make the people flock, andbring the money in.”
Grigory frowned, seeing that Fyodor Pavlovitch was by no means touched,but, as usual, was beginning to scoff. At that moment Smerdyakov, who wasstanding by the door, smiled. Smerdyakov often waited at table towards theend of dinner, and since Ivan’s arrival in our town he had done so everyday.
“What are you grinning at?” asked Fyodor Pavlovitch, catching the smileinstantly, and knowing that it referred to Grigory.
“Well, my opinion is,” Smerdyakov began suddenly and unexpectedly in aloud voice, “that if that laudable soldier’s exploit was so very greatthere would have been, to my thinking, no sin in it if he had on such anemergency renounced, so to speak, the name of Christ and his ownchristening, to save by that same his life, for good deeds, by which, inthe course of years to expiate his cowardice.”
“How could it not be a sin? You’re talking nonsense. For that you’ll gostraight to hell and be roasted there like mutton,” put in FyodorPavlovitch.
It was at this point that Alyosha came in, and Fyodor Pavlovitch, as wehave seen, was highly delighted at his appearance.
“We’re on your subject, your subject,” he chuckled gleefully, makingAlyosha sit down to listen.
“As for mutton, that’s not so, and there’ll be nothing there for this, andthere shouldn’t be either, if it’s according to justice,” Smerdyakovmaintained stoutly.
“How do you mean ‘according to justice’?” Fyodor Pavlovitch cried stillmore gayly, nudging Alyosha with his knee.
“He’s a rascal, that’s what he is!” burst from Grigory. He lookedSmerdyakov wrathfully in the face.
“As for being a rascal, wait a little, Grigory Vassilyevitch,” answeredSmerdyakov with perfect composure. “You’d better consider yourself that,once I am taken prisoner by the enemies of the Christian race, and theydemand from me to curse the name of God and to renounce my holychristening, I am fully entitled to act by my own reason, since therewould be no sin in it.”
“But you’ve said that before. Don’t waste words. Prove it,” cried FyodorPavlovitch.
“Soup‐maker!” muttered Grigory contemptuously.
“As for being a soup‐maker, wait a bit, too, and consider for yourself,Grigory Vassilyevitch, without abusing me. For as soon as I say to thoseenemies, ‘No, I’m not a Christian, and I curse my true God,’ then at once,by God’s high judgment, I become immediately and specially anathemaaccursed, and am cut off from the Holy Church, exactly as though I were aheathen, so that at that very instant, not only when I say it aloud, butwhen I think of saying it, before a quarter of a second has passed, I amcut off. Is that so or not, Grigory Vassilyevitch?”
He addressed Grigory with obvious satisfaction, though he was reallyanswering Fyodor Pavlovitch’s questions, and was well aware of it, andintentionally pretending that Grigory had asked the questions.
“Ivan,” cried Fyodor Pavlovitch suddenly, “stoop down for me to whisper.He’s got this all up for your benefit. He wants you to praise him. Praisehim.”
Ivan listened with perfect seriousness to his father’s excited whisper.
“Stay, Smerdyakov, be quiet a minute,” cried Fyodor Pavlovitch once more.“Ivan, your ear again.”
Ivan bent down again with a perfectly grave face.
“I love you as I do Alyosha. Don’t think I don’t love you. Some brandy?”
“Yes.—But you’re rather drunk yourself,” thought Ivan, looking steadily athis father.
He was watching Smerdyakov with great curiosity.
“You’re anathema accursed, as it is,” Grigory suddenly burst out, “and howdare you argue, you rascal, after that, if—”
“Don’t scold him, Grigory, don’t scold him,” Fyodor Pavlovitch cut himshort.
“You should wait, Grigory Vassilyevitch, if only a short time, and listen,for I haven’t finished all I had to say. For at the very moment I becomeaccursed, at that same highest moment, I become exactly like a heathen,and my christening is taken off me and becomes of no avail. Isn’t thatso?”
“Make haste and finish, my boy,” Fyodor Pavlovitch urged him, sipping fromhis wine‐glass with relish.
“And if I’ve ceased to be a Christian, then I told no lie to the enemywhen they asked whether I was a Christian or not a Christian, seeing I hadalready been relieved by God Himself of my Christianity by reason of thethought alone, before I had time to utter a word to the enemy. And if Ihave already been discharged, in what manner and with what sort of justicecan I be held responsible as a Christian in the other world for havingdenied Christ, when, through the very thought alone, before denying Him Ihad been relieved from my christening? If I’m no longer a Christian, thenI can’t renounce Christ, for I’ve nothing then to renounce. Who will holdan unclean Tatar responsible, Grigory Vassilyevitch, even in heaven, fornot having been born a Christian? And who would punish him for that,considering that you can’t take two skins off one ox? For God AlmightyHimself, even if He did make the Tatar responsible, when he dies wouldgive him the smallest possible punishment, I imagine (since he must bepunished), judging that he is not to blame if he has come into the worldan unclean heathen, from heathen parents. The Lord God can’t surely take aTatar and say he was a Christian? That would mean that the Almighty wouldtell a real untruth. And can the Lord of Heaven and earth tell a lie, evenin one word?”
Grigory was thunderstruck and looked at the orator, his eyes nearlystarting out of his head. Though he did not clearly understand what wassaid, he had caught something in this rigmarole, and stood, looking like aman who has just hit his head against a wall. Fyodor Pavlovitch emptiedhis glass and went off into his shrill laugh.
“Alyosha! Alyosha! What do you say to that! Ah, you casuist! He must havebeen with the Jesuits, somewhere, Ivan. Oh, you stinking Jesuit, whotaught you? But you’re talking nonsense, you casuist, nonsense, nonsense,nonsense. Don’t cry, Grigory, we’ll reduce him to smoke and ashes in amoment. Tell me this, O ass; you may be right before your enemies, but youhave renounced your faith all the same in your own heart, and you sayyourself that in that very hour you became anathema accursed. And if onceyou’re anathema they won’t pat you on the head for it in hell. What do yousay to that, my fine Jesuit?”
“There is no doubt that I have renounced it in my own heart, but there wasno special sin in that. Or if there was sin, it was the most ordinary.”
“How’s that the most ordinary?”
“You lie, accursed one!” hissed Grigory.
“Consider yourself, Grigory Vassilyevitch,” Smerdyakov went on, staid andunruffled, conscious of his triumph, but, as it were, generous to thevanquished foe. “Consider yourself, Grigory Vassilyevitch; it is said inthe Scripture that if you have faith, even as a mustard seed, and bid amountain move into the sea, it will move without the least delay at yourbidding. Well, Grigory Vassilyevitch, if I’m without faith and you have sogreat a faith that you are continually swearing at me, you try yourselftelling this mountain, not to move into the sea for that’s a long way off,but even to our stinking little river which runs at the bottom of thegarden. You’ll see for yourself that it won’t budge, but will remain justwhere it is however much you shout at it, and that shows, GrigoryVassilyevitch, that you haven’t faith in the proper manner, and only abuseothers about it. Again, taking into consideration that no one in our day,not only you, but actually no one, from the highest person to the lowestpeasant, can shove mountains into the sea—except perhaps some one man inthe world, or, at most, two, and they most likely are saving their soulsin secret somewhere in the Egyptian desert, so you wouldn’t find them—ifso it be, if all the rest have no faith, will God curse all the rest? thatis, the population of the whole earth, except about two hermits in thedesert, and in His well‐known mercy will He not forgive one of them? Andso I’m persuaded that though I may once have doubted I shall be forgivenif I shed tears of repentance.”
“Stay!” cried Fyodor Pavlovitch, in a transport of delight. “So you dosuppose there are two who can move mountains? Ivan, make a note of it,write it down. There you have the Russian all over!”
“You’re quite right in saying it’s characteristic of the people’s faith,”Ivan assented, with an approving smile.
“You agree. Then it must be so, if you agree. It’s true, isn’t it,Alyosha? That’s the Russian faith all over, isn’t it?”
“No, Smerdyakov has not the Russian faith at all,” said Alyosha firmly andgravely.
“I’m not talking about his faith. I mean those two in the desert, onlythat idea. Surely that’s Russian, isn’t it?”
“Yes, that’s purely Russian,” said Alyosha smiling.
“Your words are worth a gold piece, O ass, and I’ll give it to you to‐day.But as to the rest you talk nonsense, nonsense, nonsense. Let me tell you,stupid, that we here are all of little faith, only from carelessness,because we haven’t time; things are too much for us, and, in the secondplace, the Lord God has given us so little time, only twenty‐four hours inthe day, so that one hasn’t even time to get sleep enough, much less torepent of one’s sins. While you have denied your faith to your enemieswhen you’d nothing else to think about but to show your faith! So Iconsider, brother, that it constitutes a sin.”
“Constitute a sin it may, but consider yourself, Grigory Vassilyevitch,that it only extenuates it, if it does constitute. If I had believed thenin very truth, as I ought to have believed, then it really would have beensinful if I had not faced tortures for my faith, and had gone over to thepagan Mohammedan faith. But, of course, it wouldn’t have come to torturethen, because I should only have had to say at that instant to themountain, ‘Move and crush the tormentor,’ and it would have moved and atthe very instant have crushed him like a black‐beetle, and I should havewalked away as though nothing had happened, praising and glorifying God.But, suppose at that very moment I had tried all that, and cried to thatmountain, ‘Crush these tormentors,’ and it hadn’t crushed them, how couldI have helped doubting, pray, at such a time, and at such a dread hour ofmortal terror? And apart from that, I should know already that I could notattain to the fullness of the Kingdom of Heaven (for since the mountainhad not moved at my word, they could not think very much of my faith upaloft, and there could be no very great reward awaiting me in the world tocome). So why should I let them flay the skin off me as well, and to nogood purpose? For, even though they had flayed my skin half off my back,even then the mountain would not have moved at my word or at my cry. Andat such a moment not only doubt might come over one but one might loseone’s reason from fear, so that one would not be able to think at all.And, therefore, how should I be particularly to blame if not seeing myadvantage or reward there or here, I should, at least, save my skin. Andso trusting fully in the grace of the Lord I should cherish the hope thatI might be altogether forgiven.”


Chapter VIII. Over The Brandy

The controversy was over. But, strange to say, Fyodor Pavlovitch, who hadbeen so gay, suddenly began frowning. He frowned and gulped brandy, and itwas already a glass too much.
“Get along with you, Jesuits!” he cried to the servants. “Go away,Smerdyakov. I’ll send you the gold piece I promised you to‐day, but beoff! Don’t cry, Grigory. Go to Marfa. She’ll comfort you and put you tobed. The rascals won’t let us sit in peace after dinner,” he snappedpeevishly, as the servants promptly withdrew at his word.
“Smerdyakov always pokes himself in now, after dinner. It’s you he’s sointerested in. What have you done to fascinate him?” he added to Ivan.
“Nothing whatever,” answered Ivan. “He’s pleased to have a high opinion ofme; he’s a lackey and a mean soul. Raw material for revolution, however,when the time comes.”
“For revolution?”
“There will be others and better ones. But there will be some like him aswell. His kind will come first, and better ones after.”
“And when will the time come?”
“The rocket will go off and fizzle out, perhaps. The peasants are not veryfond of listening to these soup‐makers, so far.”
“Ah, brother, but a Balaam’s ass like that thinks and thinks, and thedevil knows where he gets to.”
“He’s storing up ideas,” said Ivan, smiling.
“You see, I know he can’t bear me, nor any one else, even you, though youfancy that he has a high opinion of you. Worse still with Alyosha, hedespises Alyosha. But he doesn’t steal, that’s one thing, and he’s not agossip, he holds his tongue, and doesn’t wash our dirty linen in public.He makes capital fish pasties too. But, damn him, is he worth talkingabout so much?”
“Of course he isn’t.”
“And as for the ideas he may be hatching, the Russian peasant, generallyspeaking, needs thrashing. That I’ve always maintained. Our peasants areswindlers, and don’t deserve to be pitied, and it’s a good thing they’restill flogged sometimes. Russia is rich in birches. If they destroyed theforests, it would be the ruin of Russia. I stand up for the clever people.We’ve left off thrashing the peasants, we’ve grown so clever, but they goon thrashing themselves. And a good thing too. ‘For with what measure yemete it shall be measured to you again,’ or how does it go? Anyhow, itwill be measured. But Russia’s all swinishness. My dear, if you only knewhow I hate Russia.... That is, not Russia, but all this vice! But maybe Imean Russia. _Tout cela c’est de la cochonnerie_.... Do you know what Ilike? I like wit.”
“You’ve had another glass. That’s enough.”
“Wait a bit. I’ll have one more, and then another, and then I’ll stop. No,stay, you interrupted me. At Mokroe I was talking to an old man, and hetold me: ‘There’s nothing we like so much as sentencing girls to bethrashed, and we always give the lads the job of thrashing them. And thegirl he has thrashed to‐day, the young man will ask in marriage to‐morrow.So it quite suits the girls, too,’ he said. There’s a set of de Sades foryou! But it’s clever, anyway. Shall we go over and have a look at it, eh?Alyosha, are you blushing? Don’t be bashful, child. I’m sorry I didn’tstay to dinner at the Superior’s and tell the monks about the girls atMokroe. Alyosha, don’t be angry that I offended your Superior thismorning. I lost my temper. If there is a God, if He exists, then, ofcourse, I’m to blame, and I shall have to answer for it. But if thereisn’t a God at all, what do they deserve, your fathers? It’s not enough tocut their heads off, for they keep back progress. Would you believe it,Ivan, that that lacerates my sentiments? No, you don’t believe it as I seefrom your eyes. You believe what people say, that I’m nothing but abuffoon. Alyosha, do you believe that I’m nothing but a buffoon?”
“No, I don’t believe it.”
“And I believe you don’t, and that you speak the truth. You look sincereand you speak sincerely. But not Ivan. Ivan’s supercilious.... I’d make anend of your monks, though, all the same. I’d take all that mystic stuffand suppress it, once for all, all over Russia, so as to bring all thefools to reason. And the gold and the silver that would flow into themint!”
“But why suppress it?” asked Ivan.
“That Truth may prevail. That’s why.”
“Well, if Truth were to prevail, you know, you’d be the first to be robbedand suppressed.”
“Ah! I dare say you’re right. Ah, I’m an ass!” burst out FyodorPavlovitch, striking himself lightly on the forehead. “Well, yourmonastery may stand then, Alyosha, if that’s how it is. And we cleverpeople will sit snug and enjoy our brandy. You know, Ivan, it must havebeen so ordained by the Almighty Himself. Ivan, speak, is there a God ornot? Stay, speak the truth, speak seriously. Why are you laughing again?”
“I’m laughing that you should have made a clever remark just now aboutSmerdyakov’s belief in the existence of two saints who could movemountains.”
“Why, am I like him now, then?”
“Very much.”
“Well, that shows I’m a Russian, too, and I have a Russian characteristic.And you may be caught in the same way, though you are a philosopher. ShallI catch you? What do you bet that I’ll catch you to‐morrow. Speak, all thesame, is there a God, or not? Only, be serious. I want you to be seriousnow.”
“No, there is no God.”
“Alyosha, is there a God?”
“There is.”
“Ivan, and is there immortality of some sort, just a little, just a tinybit?”
“There is no immortality either.”
“None at all?”
“None at all.”
“There’s absolute nothingness then. Perhaps there is just something?Anything is better than nothing!”
“Absolute nothingness.”
“Alyosha, is there immortality?”
“There is.”
“God and immortality?”
“God and immortality. In God is immortality.”
“H’m! It’s more likely Ivan’s right. Good Lord! to think what faith, whatforce of all kinds, man has lavished for nothing, on that dream, and forhow many thousand years. Who is it laughing at man? Ivan! For the lasttime, once for all, is there a God or not? I ask for the last time!”
“And for the last time there is not.”
“Who is laughing at mankind, Ivan?”
“It must be the devil,” said Ivan, smiling.
“And the devil? Does he exist?”
“No, there’s no devil either.”
“It’s a pity. Damn it all, what wouldn’t I do to the man who firstinvented God! Hanging on a bitter aspen tree would be too good for him.”
“There would have been no civilization if they hadn’t invented God.”
“Wouldn’t there have been? Without God?”
“No. And there would have been no brandy either. But I must take yourbrandy away from you, anyway.”
“Stop, stop, stop, dear boy, one more little glass. I’ve hurt Alyosha’sfeelings. You’re not angry with me, Alyosha? My dear little Alexey!”
“No, I am not angry. I know your thoughts. Your heart is better than yourhead.”
“My heart better than my head, is it? Oh, Lord! And that from you. Ivan,do you love Alyosha?”
“Yes.”
“You must love him” (Fyodor Pavlovitch was by this time very drunk).“Listen, Alyosha, I was rude to your elder this morning. But I wasexcited. But there’s wit in that elder, don’t you think, Ivan?”
“Very likely.”
“There is, there is. _Il y a du Piron là‐dedans._ He’s a Jesuit, a Russianone, that is. As he’s an honorable person there’s a hidden indignationboiling within him at having to pretend and affect holiness.”
“But, of course, he believes in God.”
“Not a bit of it. Didn’t you know? Why, he tells every one so, himself.That is, not every one, but all the clever people who come to him. He saidstraight out to Governor Schultz not long ago: ‘_Credo_, but I don’t knowin what.’ ”
“Really?”
“He really did. But I respect him. There’s something of Mephistophelesabout him, or rather of ‘The hero of our time’ ... Arbenin, or what’s hisname?... You see, he’s a sensualist. He’s such a sensualist that I shouldbe afraid for my daughter or my wife if she went to confess to him. Youknow, when he begins telling stories.... The year before last he invitedus to tea, tea with liqueur (the ladies send him liqueur), and begantelling us about old times till we nearly split our sides.... Especiallyhow he once cured a paralyzed woman. ‘If my legs were not bad I know adance I could dance you,’ he said. What do you say to that? ‘I’ve plentyof tricks in my time,’ said he. He did Dernidov, the merchant, out ofsixty thousand.”
“What, he stole it?”
“He brought him the money as a man he could trust, saying, ‘Take care ofit for me, friend, there’ll be a police search at my place to‐morrow.’ Andhe kept it. ‘You have given it to the Church,’ he declared. I said to him:‘You’re a scoundrel,’ I said. ‘No,’ said he, ‘I’m not a scoundrel, but I’mbroad‐minded.’ But that wasn’t he, that was some one else. I’ve muddledhim with some one else ... without noticing it. Come, another glass andthat’s enough. Take away the bottle, Ivan. I’ve been telling lies. Whydidn’t you stop me, Ivan, and tell me I was lying?”
“I knew you’d stop of yourself.”
“That’s a lie. You did it from spite, from simple spite against me. Youdespise me. You have come to me and despised me in my own house.”
“Well, I’m going away. You’ve had too much brandy.”
“I’ve begged you for Christ’s sake to go to Tchermashnya for a day or two,and you don’t go.”
“I’ll go to‐morrow if you’re so set upon it.”
“You won’t go. You want to keep an eye on me. That’s what you want,spiteful fellow. That’s why you won’t go.”
The old man persisted. He had reached that state of drunkenness when thedrunkard who has till then been inoffensive tries to pick a quarrel and toassert himself.
“Why are you looking at me? Why do you look like that? Your eyes look atme and say, ‘You ugly drunkard!’ Your eyes are mistrustful. They’recontemptuous.... You’ve come here with some design. Alyosha, here, looksat me and his eyes shine. Alyosha doesn’t despise me. Alexey, you mustn’tlove Ivan.”
“Don’t be ill‐tempered with my brother. Leave off attacking him,” Alyoshasaid emphatically.
“Oh, all right. Ugh, my head aches. Take away the brandy, Ivan. It’s thethird time I’ve told you.”
He mused, and suddenly a slow, cunning grin spread over his face.
“Don’t be angry with a feeble old man, Ivan. I know you don’t love me, butdon’t be angry all the same. You’ve nothing to love me for. You go toTchermashnya. I’ll come to you myself and bring you a present. I’ll showyou a little wench there. I’ve had my eye on her a long time. She’s stillrunning about bare‐foot. Don’t be afraid of bare‐footed wenches—don’tdespise them—they’re pearls!”
And he kissed his hand with a smack.
“To my thinking,” he revived at once, seeming to grow sober the instant hetouched on his favorite topic. “To my thinking ... Ah, you boys! Youchildren, little sucking‐pigs, to my thinking ... I never thought a womanugly in my life—that’s been my rule! Can you understand that? How couldyou understand it? You’ve milk in your veins, not blood. You’re not out ofyour shells yet. My rule has been that you can always find somethingdevilishly interesting in every woman that you wouldn’t find in any other.Only, one must know how to find it, that’s the point! That’s a talent! Tomy mind there are no ugly women. The very fact that she is a woman is halfthe battle ... but how could you understand that? Even in _vieillesfilles_, even in them you may discover something that makes you simplywonder that men have been such fools as to let them grow old withoutnoticing them. Bare‐footed girls or unattractive ones, you must take bysurprise. Didn’t you know that? You must astound them till they’refascinated, upset, ashamed that such a gentleman should fall in love withsuch a little slut. It’s a jolly good thing that there always are and willbe masters and slaves in the world, so there always will be a little maid‐of‐all‐work and her master, and you know, that’s all that’s needed forhappiness. Stay ... listen, Alyosha, I always used to surprise yourmother, but in a different way. I paid no attention to her at all, but allat once, when the minute came, I’d be all devotion to her, crawl on myknees, kiss her feet, and I always, always—I remember it as though it wereto‐day—reduced her to that tinkling, quiet, nervous, queer little laugh.It was peculiar to her. I knew her attacks always used to begin like that.The next day she would begin shrieking hysterically, and this little laughwas not a sign of delight, though it made a very good counterfeit. That’sthe great thing, to know how to take every one. Once Belyavsky—he was ahandsome fellow, and rich—used to like to come here and hang abouther—suddenly gave me a slap in the face in her presence. And she—such amild sheep—why, I thought she would have knocked me down for that blow.How she set on me! ‘You’re beaten, beaten now,’ she said. ‘You’ve taken ablow from him. You have been trying to sell me to him,’ she said.... ‘Andhow dared he strike you in my presence! Don’t dare come near me again,never, never! Run at once, challenge him to a duel!’... I took her to themonastery then to bring her to her senses. The holy Fathers prayed herback to reason. But I swear, by God, Alyosha, I never insulted the poorcrazy girl! Only once, perhaps, in the first year; then she was very fondof praying. She used to keep the feasts of Our Lady particularly and usedto turn me out of her room then. I’ll knock that mysticism out of her,thought I! ‘Here,’ said I, ‘you see your holy image. Here it is. Here Itake it down. You believe it’s miraculous, but here, I’ll spit on itdirectly and nothing will happen to me for it!’... When she saw it, goodLord! I thought she would kill me. But she only jumped up, wrung herhands, then suddenly hid her face in them, began trembling all over andfell on the floor ... fell all of a heap. Alyosha, Alyosha, what’s thematter?”
The old man jumped up in alarm. From the time he had begun speaking abouthis mother, a change had gradually come over Alyosha’s face. He flushedcrimson, his eyes glowed, his lips quivered. The old sot had gonespluttering on, noticing nothing, till the moment when something verystrange happened to Alyosha. Precisely what he was describing in the crazywoman was suddenly repeated with Alyosha. He jumped up from his seatexactly as his mother was said to have done, wrung his hands, hid his facein them, and fell back in his chair, shaking all over in an hystericalparoxysm of sudden violent, silent weeping. His extraordinary resemblanceto his mother particularly impressed the old man.
“Ivan, Ivan! Water, quickly! It’s like her, exactly as she used to bethen, his mother. Spurt some water on him from your mouth, that’s what Iused to do to her. He’s upset about his mother, his mother,” he mutteredto Ivan.
“But she was my mother, too, I believe, his mother. Was she not?” saidIvan, with uncontrolled anger and contempt. The old man shrank before hisflashing eyes. But something very strange had happened, though only for asecond; it seemed really to have escaped the old man’s mind that Alyosha’smother actually was the mother of Ivan too.
“Your mother?” he muttered, not understanding. “What do you mean? Whatmother are you talking about? Was she?... Why, damn it! of course she wasyours too! Damn it! My mind has never been so darkened before. Excuse me,why, I was thinking, Ivan.... He he he!” He stopped. A broad, drunken,half‐senseless grin overspread his face.
At that moment a fearful noise and clamor was heard in the hall, therewere violent shouts, the door was flung open, and Dmitri burst into theroom. The old man rushed to Ivan in terror.
“He’ll kill me! He’ll kill me! Don’t let him get at me!” he screamed,clinging to the skirt of Ivan’s coat.


Chapter IX. The Sensualists

Grigory and Smerdyakov ran into the room after Dmitri. They had beenstruggling with him in the passage, refusing to admit him, acting oninstructions given them by Fyodor Pavlovitch some days before. Takingadvantage of the fact that Dmitri stopped a moment on entering the room tolook about him, Grigory ran round the table, closed the double doors onthe opposite side of the room leading to the inner apartments, and stoodbefore the closed doors, stretching wide his arms, prepared to defend theentrance, so to speak, with the last drop of his blood. Seeing this,Dmitri uttered a scream rather than a shout and rushed at Grigory.
“Then she’s there! She’s hidden there! Out of the way, scoundrel!”
He tried to pull Grigory away, but the old servant pushed him back. Besidehimself with fury, Dmitri struck out, and hit Grigory with all his might.The old man fell like a log, and Dmitri, leaping over him, broke in thedoor. Smerdyakov remained pale and trembling at the other end of the room,huddling close to Fyodor Pavlovitch.
“She’s here!” shouted Dmitri. “I saw her turn towards the house just now,but I couldn’t catch her. Where is she? Where is she?”
That shout, “She’s here!” produced an indescribable effect on FyodorPavlovitch. All his terror left him.
“Hold him! Hold him!” he cried, and dashed after Dmitri. Meanwhile Grigoryhad got up from the floor, but still seemed stunned. Ivan and Alyosha ranafter their father. In the third room something was heard to fall on thefloor with a ringing crash: it was a large glass vase—not an expensiveone—on a marble pedestal which Dmitri had upset as he ran past it.
“At him!” shouted the old man. “Help!”
Ivan and Alyosha caught the old man and were forcibly bringing him back.
“Why do you run after him? He’ll murder you outright,” Ivan criedwrathfully at his father.
“Ivan! Alyosha! She must be here. Grushenka’s here. He said he saw herhimself, running.”
He was choking. He was not expecting Grushenka at the time, and the suddennews that she was here made him beside himself. He was trembling all over.He seemed frantic.
“But you’ve seen for yourself that she hasn’t come,” cried Ivan.
“But she may have come by that other entrance.”
“You know that entrance is locked, and you have the key.”
Dmitri suddenly reappeared in the drawing‐room. He had, of course, foundthe other entrance locked, and the key actually was in Fyodor Pavlovitch’spocket. The windows of all the rooms were also closed, so Grushenka couldnot have come in anywhere nor have run out anywhere.
“Hold him!” shrieked Fyodor Pavlovitch, as soon as he saw him again. “He’sbeen stealing money in my bedroom.” And tearing himself from Ivan herushed again at Dmitri. But Dmitri threw up both hands and suddenlyclutched the old man by the two tufts of hair that remained on histemples, tugged at them, and flung him with a crash on the floor. Hekicked him two or three times with his heel in the face. The old manmoaned shrilly. Ivan, though not so strong as Dmitri, threw his arms roundhim, and with all his might pulled him away. Alyosha helped him with hisslender strength, holding Dmitri in front.
“Madman! You’ve killed him!” cried Ivan.
“Serve him right!” shouted Dmitri breathlessly. “If I haven’t killed him,I’ll come again and kill him. You can’t protect him!”
“Dmitri! Go away at once!” cried Alyosha commandingly.
“Alexey! You tell me. It’s only you I can believe; was she here just now,or not? I saw her myself creeping this way by the fence from the lane. Ishouted, she ran away.”
“I swear she’s not been here, and no one expected her.”
“But I saw her.... So she must ... I’ll find out at once where she is....Good‐by, Alexey! Not a word to Æsop about the money now. But go toKaterina Ivanovna at once and be sure to say, ‘He sends his compliments toyou!’ Compliments, his compliments! Just compliments and farewell!Describe the scene to her.”
Meanwhile Ivan and Grigory had raised the old man and seated him in anarm‐chair. His face was covered with blood, but he was conscious andlistened greedily to Dmitri’s cries. He was still fancying that Grushenkareally was somewhere in the house. Dmitri looked at him with hatred as hewent out.
“I don’t repent shedding your blood!” he cried. “Beware, old man, bewareof your dream, for I have my dream, too. I curse you, and disown youaltogether.”
He ran out of the room.
“She’s here. She must be here. Smerdyakov! Smerdyakov!” the old manwheezed, scarcely audibly, beckoning to him with his finger.
“No, she’s not here, you old lunatic!” Ivan shouted at him angrily. “Here,he’s fainting! Water! A towel! Make haste, Smerdyakov!”
Smerdyakov ran for water. At last they got the old man undressed, and puthim to bed. They wrapped a wet towel round his head. Exhausted by thebrandy, by his violent emotion, and the blows he had received, he shut hiseyes and fell asleep as soon as his head touched the pillow. Ivan andAlyosha went back to the drawing‐room. Smerdyakov removed the fragments ofthe broken vase, while Grigory stood by the table looking gloomily at thefloor.
“Shouldn’t you put a wet bandage on your head and go to bed, too?” Alyoshasaid to him. “We’ll look after him. My brother gave you a terrible blow—onthe head.”
“He’s insulted me!” Grigory articulated gloomily and distinctly.
“He’s ‘insulted’ his father, not only you,” observed Ivan with a forcedsmile.
“I used to wash him in his tub. He’s insulted me,” repeated Grigory.
“Damn it all, if I hadn’t pulled him away perhaps he’d have murdered him.It wouldn’t take much to do for Æsop, would it?” whispered Ivan toAlyosha.
“God forbid!” cried Alyosha.
“Why should He forbid?” Ivan went on in the same whisper, with a malignantgrimace. “One reptile will devour the other. And serve them both right,too.”
Alyosha shuddered.
“Of course I won’t let him be murdered as I didn’t just now. Stay here,Alyosha, I’ll go for a turn in the yard. My head’s begun to ache.”
Alyosha went to his father’s bedroom and sat by his bedside behind thescreen for about an hour. The old man suddenly opened his eyes and gazedfor a long while at Alyosha, evidently remembering and meditating. All atonce his face betrayed extraordinary excitement.
“Alyosha,” he whispered apprehensively, “where’s Ivan?”
“In the yard. He’s got a headache. He’s on the watch.”
“Give me that looking‐glass. It stands over there. Give it me.”
Alyosha gave him a little round folding looking‐glass which stood on thechest of drawers. The old man looked at himself in it; his nose wasconsiderably swollen, and on the left side of his forehead there was arather large crimson bruise.
“What does Ivan say? Alyosha, my dear, my only son, I’m afraid of Ivan.I’m more afraid of Ivan than the other. You’re the only one I’m not afraidof....”
“Don’t be afraid of Ivan either. He is angry, but he’ll defend you.”
“Alyosha, and what of the other? He’s run to Grushenka. My angel, tell methe truth, was she here just now or not?”
“No one has seen her. It was a mistake. She has not been here.”
“You know Mitya wants to marry her, to marry her.”
“She won’t marry him.”
“She won’t. She won’t. She won’t. She won’t on any account!”
The old man fairly fluttered with joy, as though nothing more comfortingcould have been said to him. In his delight he seized Alyosha’s hand andpressed it warmly to his heart. Tears positively glittered in his eyes.
“That image of the Mother of God of which I was telling you just now,” hesaid. “Take it home and keep it for yourself. And I’ll let you go back tothe monastery.... I was joking this morning, don’t be angry with me. Myhead aches, Alyosha.... Alyosha, comfort my heart. Be an angel and tell methe truth!”
“You’re still asking whether she has been here or not?” Alyosha saidsorrowfully.
“No, no, no. I believe you. I’ll tell you what it is: you go to Grushenkayourself, or see her somehow; make haste and ask her; see for yourself,which she means to choose, him or me. Eh? What? Can you?”
“If I see her I’ll ask her,” Alyosha muttered, embarrassed.
“No, she won’t tell you,” the old man interrupted, “she’s a rogue. She’llbegin kissing you and say that it’s you she wants. She’s a deceitful,shameless hussy. You mustn’t go to her, you mustn’t!”
“No, father, and it wouldn’t be suitable, it wouldn’t be right at all.”
“Where was he sending you just now? He shouted ‘Go’ as he ran away.”
“To Katerina Ivanovna.”
“For money? To ask her for money?”
“No. Not for money.”
“He’s no money; not a farthing. I’ll settle down for the night, and thinkthings over, and you can go. Perhaps you’ll meet her.... Only be sure tocome to me to‐morrow in the morning. Be sure to. I have a word to say toyou to‐morrow. Will you come?”
“Yes.”
“When you come, pretend you’ve come of your own accord to ask after me.Don’t tell any one I told you to. Don’t say a word to Ivan.”
“Very well.”
“Good‐by, my angel. You stood up for me, just now. I shall never forgetit. I’ve a word to say to you to‐morrow—but I must think about it.”
“And how do you feel now?”
“I shall get up to‐morrow and go out, perfectly well, perfectly well!”
Crossing the yard Alyosha found Ivan sitting on the bench at the gateway.He was sitting writing something in pencil in his note‐book. Alyosha toldIvan that their father had waked up, was conscious, and had let him goback to sleep at the monastery.
“Alyosha, I should be very glad to meet you to‐morrow morning,” said Ivancordially, standing up. His cordiality was a complete surprise to Alyosha.
“I shall be at the Hohlakovs’ to‐morrow,” answered Alyosha, “I may be atKaterina Ivanovna’s, too, if I don’t find her now.”
“But you’re going to her now, anyway? For that ‘compliments andfarewell,’ ” said Ivan smiling. Alyosha was disconcerted.
“I think I quite understand his exclamations just now, and part of whatwent before. Dmitri has asked you to go to her and say that he—well, infact—takes his leave of her?”
“Brother, how will all this horror end between father and Dmitri?”exclaimed Alyosha.
“One can’t tell for certain. Perhaps in nothing: it may all fizzle out.That woman is a beast. In any case we must keep the old man indoors andnot let Dmitri in the house.”
“Brother, let me ask one thing more: has any man a right to look at othermen and decide which is worthy to live?”
“Why bring in the question of worth? The matter is most often decided inmen’s hearts on other grounds much more natural. And as for rights—who hasnot the right to wish?”
“Not for another man’s death?”
“What even if for another man’s death? Why lie to oneself since all menlive so and perhaps cannot help living so. Are you referring to what Isaid just now—that one reptile will devour the other? In that case let meask you, do you think me like Dmitri capable of shedding Æsop’s blood,murdering him, eh?”
“What are you saying, Ivan? Such an idea never crossed my mind. I don’tthink Dmitri is capable of it, either.”
“Thanks, if only for that,” smiled Ivan. “Be sure, I should always defendhim. But in my wishes I reserve myself full latitude in this case. Good‐bytill to‐morrow. Don’t condemn me, and don’t look on me as a villain,” headded with a smile.
They shook hands warmly as they had never done before. Alyosha felt thathis brother had taken the first step towards him, and that he hadcertainly done this with some definite motive.


Chapter X. Both Together

Alyosha left his father’s house feeling even more exhausted and dejectedin spirit than when he had entered it. His mind too seemed shattered andunhinged, while he felt that he was afraid to put together the disjointedfragments and form a general idea from all the agonizing and conflictingexperiences of the day. He felt something bordering upon despair, which hehad never known till then. Towering like a mountain above all the reststood the fatal, insoluble question: How would things end between hisfather and his brother Dmitri with this terrible woman? Now he had himselfbeen a witness of it, he had been present and seen them face to face. Yetonly his brother Dmitri could be made unhappy, terribly, completelyunhappy: there was trouble awaiting him. It appeared too that there wereother people concerned, far more so than Alyosha could have supposedbefore. There was something positively mysterious in it, too. Ivan hadmade a step towards him, which was what Alyosha had been long desiring.Yet now he felt for some reason that he was frightened at it. And thesewomen? Strange to say, that morning he had set out for Katerina Ivanovna’sin the greatest embarrassment; now he felt nothing of the kind. On thecontrary, he was hastening there as though expecting to find guidance fromher. Yet to give her this message was obviously more difficult thanbefore. The matter of the three thousand was decided irrevocably, andDmitri, feeling himself dishonored and losing his last hope, might sink toany depth. He had, moreover, told him to describe to Katerina Ivanovna thescene which had just taken place with his father.
It was by now seven o’clock, and it was getting dark as Alyosha enteredthe very spacious and convenient house in the High Street occupied byKaterina Ivanovna. Alyosha knew that she lived with two aunts. One ofthem, a woman of little education, was that aunt of her half‐sister AgafyaIvanovna who had looked after her in her father’s house when she came fromboarding‐school. The other aunt was a Moscow lady of style andconsequence, though in straitened circumstances. It was said that theyboth gave way in everything to Katerina Ivanovna, and that she only keptthem with her as chaperons. Katerina Ivanovna herself gave way to no onebut her benefactress, the general’s widow, who had been kept by illness inMoscow, and to whom she was obliged to write twice a week a full accountof all her doings.
When Alyosha entered the hall and asked the maid who opened the door tohim to take his name up, it was evident that they were already aware ofhis arrival. Possibly he had been noticed from the window. At least,Alyosha heard a noise, caught the sound of flying footsteps and rustlingskirts. Two or three women, perhaps, had run out of the room.
Alyosha thought it strange that his arrival should cause such excitement.He was conducted however to the drawing‐room at once. It was a large room,elegantly and amply furnished, not at all in provincial style. There weremany sofas, lounges, settees, big and little tables. There were pictureson the walls, vases and lamps on the tables, masses of flowers, and evenan aquarium in the window. It was twilight and rather dark. Alyosha madeout a silk mantle thrown down on the sofa, where people had evidently justbeen sitting; and on a table in front of the sofa were two unfinished cupsof chocolate, cakes, a glass saucer with blue raisins, and another withsweetmeats. Alyosha saw that he had interrupted visitors, and frowned. Butat that instant the portière was raised, and with rapid, hurryingfootsteps Katerina Ivanovna came in, holding out both hands to Alyoshawith a radiant smile of delight. At the same instant a servant brought intwo lighted candles and set them on the table.
“Thank God! At last you have come too! I’ve been simply praying for youall day! Sit down.”
Alyosha had been struck by Katerina Ivanovna’s beauty when, three weeksbefore, Dmitri had first brought him, at Katerina Ivanovna’s specialrequest, to be introduced to her. There had been no conversation betweenthem at that interview, however. Supposing Alyosha to be very shy,Katerina Ivanovna had talked all the time to Dmitri to spare him. Alyoshahad been silent, but he had seen a great deal very clearly. He was struckby the imperiousness, proud ease, and self‐confidence of the haughty girl.And all that was certain, Alyosha felt that he was not exaggerating it. Hethought her great glowing black eyes were very fine, especially with herpale, even rather sallow, longish face. But in those eyes and in the linesof her exquisite lips there was something with which his brother mightwell be passionately in love, but which perhaps could not be loved forlong. He expressed this thought almost plainly to Dmitri when, after thevisit, his brother besought and insisted that he should not conceal hisimpressions on seeing his betrothed.
“You’ll be happy with her, but perhaps—not tranquilly happy.”
“Quite so, brother. Such people remain always the same. They don’t yieldto fate. So you think I shan’t love her for ever.”
“No; perhaps you will love her for ever. But perhaps you won’t always behappy with her.”
Alyosha had given his opinion at the time, blushing, and angry withhimself for having yielded to his brother’s entreaties and put such“foolish” ideas into words. For his opinion had struck him as awfullyfoolish immediately after he had uttered it. He felt ashamed too of havinggiven so confident an opinion about a woman. It was with the moreamazement that he felt now, at the first glance at Katerina Ivanovna asshe ran in to him, that he had perhaps been utterly mistaken. This timeher face was beaming with spontaneous good‐natured kindliness, and directwarm‐hearted sincerity. The “pride and haughtiness,” which had struckAlyosha so much before, was only betrayed now in a frank, generous energyand a sort of bright, strong faith in herself. Alyosha realized at thefirst glance, at the first word, that all the tragedy of her position inrelation to the man she loved so dearly was no secret to her; that sheperhaps already knew everything, positively everything. And yet, in spiteof that, there was such brightness in her face, such faith in the future.Alyosha felt at once that he had gravely wronged her in his thoughts. Hewas conquered and captivated immediately. Besides all this, he noticed ather first words that she was in great excitement, an excitement perhapsquite exceptional and almost approaching ecstasy.
“I was so eager to see you, because I can learn from you the wholetruth—from you and no one else.”
“I have come,” muttered Alyosha confusedly, “I—he sent me.”
“Ah, he sent you! I foresaw that. Now I know everything—everything!” criedKaterina Ivanovna, her eyes flashing. “Wait a moment, Alexey Fyodorovitch,I’ll tell you why I’ve been so longing to see you. You see, I know perhapsfar more than you do yourself, and there’s no need for you to tell meanything. I’ll tell you what I want from you. I want to know your own lastimpression of him. I want you to tell me most directly, plainly, coarselyeven (oh, as coarsely as you like!), what you thought of him just now andof his position after your meeting with him to‐day. That will perhaps bebetter than if I had a personal explanation with him, as he does not wantto come to me. Do you understand what I want from you? Now, tell mesimply, tell me every word of the message he sent you with (I knew hewould send you).”
“He told me to give you his compliments—and to say that he would nevercome again—but to give you his compliments.”
“His compliments? Was that what he said—his own expression?”
“Yes.”
“Accidentally perhaps he made a mistake in the word, perhaps he did notuse the right word?”
“No; he told me precisely to repeat that word. He begged me two or threetimes not to forget to say so.”
Katerina Ivanovna flushed hotly.
“Help me now, Alexey Fyodorovitch. Now I really need your help. I’ll tellyou what I think, and you must simply say whether it’s right or not.Listen! If he had sent me his compliments in passing, without insisting onyour repeating the words, without emphasizing them, that would be the endof everything! But if he particularly insisted on those words, if heparticularly told you not to forget to repeat them to me, then perhaps hewas in excitement, beside himself. He had made his decision and wasfrightened at it. He wasn’t walking away from me with a resolute step, butleaping headlong. The emphasis on that phrase may have been simplybravado.”
“Yes, yes!” cried Alyosha warmly. “I believe that is it.”
“And, if so, he’s not altogether lost. I can still save him. Stay! Did henot tell you anything about money—about three thousand roubles?”
“He did speak about it, and it’s that more than anything that’s crushinghim. He said he had lost his honor and that nothing matters now,” Alyoshaanswered warmly, feeling a rush of hope in his heart and believing thatthere really might be a way of escape and salvation for his brother. “Butdo you know about the money?” he added, and suddenly broke off.
“I’ve known of it a long time; I telegraphed to Moscow to inquire, andheard long ago that the money had not arrived. He hadn’t sent the money,but I said nothing. Last week I learnt that he was still in need of money.My only object in all this was that he should know to whom to turn, andwho was his true friend. No, he won’t recognize that I am his truestfriend; he won’t know me, and looks on me merely as a woman. I’ve beentormented all the week, trying to think how to prevent him from beingashamed to face me because he spent that three thousand. Let him feelashamed of himself, let him be ashamed of other people’s knowing, but notof my knowing. He can tell God everything without shame. Why is it hestill does not understand how much I am ready to bear for his sake? Why,why doesn’t he know me? How dare he not know me after all that hashappened? I want to save him for ever. Let him forget me as his betrothed.And here he fears that he is dishonored in my eyes. Why, he wasn’t afraidto be open with you, Alexey Fyodorovitch. How is it that I don’t deservethe same?”
The last words she uttered in tears. Tears gushed from her eyes.
“I must tell you,” Alyosha began, his voice trembling too, “what happenedjust now between him and my father.”
And he described the whole scene, how Dmitri had sent him to get themoney, how he had broken in, knocked his father down, and after that hadagain specially and emphatically begged him to take his compliments andfarewell. “He went to that woman,” Alyosha added softly.
“And do you suppose that I can’t put up with that woman? Does he think Ican’t? But he won’t marry her,” she suddenly laughed nervously. “Couldsuch a passion last for ever in a Karamazov? It’s passion, not love. Hewon’t marry her because she won’t marry him.” Again Katerina Ivanovnalaughed strangely.
“He may marry her,” said Alyosha mournfully, looking down.
“He won’t marry her, I tell you. That girl is an angel. Do you know that?Do you know that?” Katerina Ivanovna exclaimed suddenly with extraordinarywarmth. “She is one of the most fantastic of fantastic creatures. I knowhow bewitching she is, but I know too that she is kind, firm and noble.Why do you look at me like that, Alexey Fyodorovitch? Perhaps you arewondering at my words, perhaps you don’t believe me? AgrafenaAlexandrovna, my angel!” she cried suddenly to some one, peeping into thenext room, “come in to us. This is a friend. This is Alyosha. He knows allabout our affairs. Show yourself to him.”
“I’ve only been waiting behind the curtain for you to call me,” said asoft, one might even say sugary, feminine voice.
The portière was raised and Grushenka herself, smiling and beaming, cameup to the table. A violent revulsion passed over Alyosha. He fixed hiseyes on her and could not take them off. Here she was, that awful woman,the “beast,” as Ivan had called her half an hour before. And yet one wouldhave thought the creature standing before him most simple and ordinary, agood‐natured, kind woman, handsome certainly, but so like other handsomeordinary women! It is true she was very, very good‐looking with thatRussian beauty so passionately loved by many men. She was a rather tallwoman, though a little shorter than Katerina Ivanovna, who wasexceptionally tall. She had a full figure, with soft, as it were,noiseless, movements, softened to a peculiar over‐sweetness, like hervoice. She moved, not like Katerina Ivanovna, with a vigorous, bold step,but noiselessly. Her feet made absolutely no sound on the floor. She sanksoftly into a low chair, softly rustling her sumptuous black silk dress,and delicately nestling her milk‐white neck and broad shoulders in acostly cashmere shawl. She was twenty‐two years old, and her face lookedexactly that age. She was very white in the face, with a pale pink tint onher cheeks. The modeling of her face might be said to be too broad, andthe lower jaw was set a trifle forward. Her upper lip was thin, but theslightly prominent lower lip was at least twice as full, and lookedpouting. But her magnificent, abundant dark brown hair, her sable‐coloredeyebrows and charming gray‐blue eyes with their long lashes would havemade the most indifferent person, meeting her casually in a crowd in thestreet, stop at the sight of her face and remember it long after. Whatstruck Alyosha most in that face was its expression of childlike goodnature. There was a childlike look in her eyes, a look of childishdelight. She came up to the table, beaming with delight and seeming toexpect something with childish, impatient, and confiding curiosity. Thelight in her eyes gladdened the soul—Alyosha felt that. There wassomething else in her which he could not understand, or would not havebeen able to define, and which yet perhaps unconsciously affected him. Itwas that softness, that voluptuousness of her bodily movements, thatcatlike noiselessness. Yet it was a vigorous, ample body. Under the shawlcould be seen full broad shoulders, a high, still quite girlish bosom. Herfigure suggested the lines of the Venus of Milo, though already insomewhat exaggerated proportions. That could be divined. Connoisseurs ofRussian beauty could have foretold with certainty that this fresh, stillyouthful beauty would lose its harmony by the age of thirty, would“spread”; that the face would become puffy, and that wrinkles would verysoon appear upon her forehead and round the eyes; the complexion wouldgrow coarse and red perhaps—in fact, that it was the beauty of the moment,the fleeting beauty which is so often met with in Russian women. Alyosha,of course, did not think of this; but though he was fascinated, yet hewondered with an unpleasant sensation, and as it were regretfully, why shedrawled in that way and could not speak naturally. She did so evidentlyfeeling there was a charm in the exaggerated, honeyed modulation of thesyllables. It was, of course, only a bad, underbred habit that showed badeducation and a false idea of good manners. And yet this intonation andmanner of speaking impressed Alyosha as almost incredibly incongruous withthe childishly simple and happy expression of her face, the soft, babyishjoy in her eyes. Katerina Ivanovna at once made her sit down in an arm‐chair facing Alyosha, and ecstatically kissed her several times on hersmiling lips. She seemed quite in love with her.
“This is the first time we’ve met, Alexey Fyodorovitch,” she saidrapturously. “I wanted to know her, to see her. I wanted to go to her, butI’d no sooner expressed the wish than she came to me. I knew we shouldsettle everything together—everything. My heart told me so—I was beggednot to take the step, but I foresaw it would be a way out of thedifficulty, and I was not mistaken. Grushenka has explained everything tome, told me all she means to do. She flew here like an angel of goodnessand brought us peace and joy.”
“You did not disdain me, sweet, excellent young lady,” drawled Grushenkain her sing‐song voice, still with the same charming smile of delight.
“Don’t dare to speak to me like that, you sorceress, you witch! Disdainyou! Here, I must kiss your lower lip once more. It looks as though itwere swollen, and now it will be more so, and more and more. Look how shelaughs, Alexey Fyodorovitch! It does one’s heart good to see the angel.”
Alyosha flushed, and faint, imperceptible shivers kept running down him.
“You make so much of me, dear young lady, and perhaps I am not at allworthy of your kindness.”
“Not worthy! She’s not worthy of it!” Katerina Ivanovna cried again withthe same warmth. “You know, Alexey Fyodorovitch, we’re fanciful, we’reself‐willed, but proudest of the proud in our little heart. We’re noble,we’re generous, Alexey Fyodorovitch, let me tell you. We have only beenunfortunate. We were too ready to make every sacrifice for an unworthy,perhaps, or fickle man. There was one man—one, an officer too, we lovedhim, we sacrificed everything to him. That was long ago, five years ago,and he has forgotten us, he has married. Now he is a widower, he haswritten, he is coming here, and, do you know, we’ve loved him, none buthim, all this time, and we’ve loved him all our life! He will come, andGrushenka will be happy again. For the last five years she’s beenwretched. But who can reproach her, who can boast of her favor? Only thatbedridden old merchant, but he is more like her father, her friend, herprotector. He found her then in despair, in agony, deserted by the man sheloved. She was ready to drown herself then, but the old merchant savedher—saved her!”
“You defend me very kindly, dear young lady. You are in a great hurryabout everything,” Grushenka drawled again.
“Defend you! Is it for me to defend you? Should I dare to defend you?Grushenka, angel, give me your hand. Look at that charming soft littlehand, Alexey Fyodorovitch! Look at it! It has brought me happiness and haslifted me up, and I’m going to kiss it, outside and inside, here, here,here!”
And three times she kissed the certainly charming, though rather fat, handof Grushenka in a sort of rapture. She held out her hand with a charmingmusical, nervous little laugh, watched the “sweet young lady,” andobviously liked having her hand kissed.
“Perhaps there’s rather too much rapture,” thought Alyosha. He blushed. Hefelt a peculiar uneasiness at heart the whole time.
“You won’t make me blush, dear young lady, kissing my hand like thisbefore Alexey Fyodorovitch.”
“Do you think I meant to make you blush?” said Katerina Ivanovna, somewhatsurprised. “Ah, my dear, how little you understand me!”
“Yes, and you too perhaps quite misunderstand me, dear young lady. MaybeI’m not so good as I seem to you. I’ve a bad heart; I will have my ownway. I fascinated poor Dmitri Fyodorovitch that day simply for fun.”
“But now you’ll save him. You’ve given me your word. You’ll explain it allto him. You’ll break to him that you have long loved another man, who isnow offering you his hand.”
“Oh, no! I didn’t give you my word to do that. It was you kept talkingabout that. I didn’t give you my word.”
“Then I didn’t quite understand you,” said Katerina Ivanovna slowly,turning a little pale. “You promised—”
“Oh, no, angel lady, I’ve promised nothing,” Grushenka interrupted softlyand evenly, still with the same gay and simple expression. “You see atonce, dear young lady, what a willful wretch I am compared with you. If Iwant to do a thing I do it. I may have made you some promise just now. Butnow again I’m thinking: I may take to Mitya again. I liked him very muchonce—liked him for almost a whole hour. Now maybe I shall go and tell himto stay with me from this day forward. You see, I’m so changeable.”
“Just now you said—something quite different,” Katerina Ivanovna whisperedfaintly.
“Ah, just now! But, you know. I’m such a soft‐hearted, silly creature.Only think what he’s gone through on my account! What if when I go home Ifeel sorry for him? What then?”
“I never expected—”
“Ah, young lady, how good and generous you are compared with me! Nowperhaps you won’t care for a silly creature like me, now you know mycharacter. Give me your sweet little hand, angelic lady,” she saidtenderly, and with a sort of reverence took Katerina Ivanovna’s hand.
“Here, dear young lady, I’ll take your hand and kiss it as you did mine.You kissed mine three times, but I ought to kiss yours three hundred timesto be even with you. Well, but let that pass. And then it shall be as Godwills. Perhaps I shall be your slave entirely and want to do your biddinglike a slave. Let it be as God wills, without any agreements and promises.What a sweet hand—what a sweet hand you have! You sweet young lady, youincredible beauty!”
She slowly raised the hands to her lips, with the strange object indeed of“being even” with her in kisses.
Katerina Ivanovna did not take her hand away. She listened with timid hopeto the last words, though Grushenka’s promise to do her bidding like aslave was very strangely expressed. She looked intently into her eyes; shestill saw in those eyes the same simple‐hearted, confiding expression, thesame bright gayety.
“She’s perhaps too naïve,” thought Katerina Ivanovna, with a gleam ofhope.
Grushenka meanwhile seemed enthusiastic over the “sweet hand.” She raisedit deliberately to her lips. But she held it for two or three minutes nearher lips, as though reconsidering something.
“Do you know, angel lady,” she suddenly drawled in an even more soft andsugary voice, “do you know, after all, I think I won’t kiss your hand?”And she laughed a little merry laugh.
“As you please. What’s the matter with you?” said Katerina Ivanovna,starting suddenly.
“So that you may be left to remember that you kissed my hand, but I didn’tkiss yours.”
There was a sudden gleam in her eyes. She looked with awful intentness atKaterina Ivanovna.
“Insolent creature!” cried Katerina Ivanovna, as though suddenly graspingsomething. She flushed all over and leapt up from her seat.
Grushenka too got up, but without haste.
“So I shall tell Mitya how you kissed my hand, but I didn’t kiss yours atall. And how he will laugh!”
“Vile slut! Go away!”
“Ah, for shame, young lady! Ah, for shame! That’s unbecoming for you, dearyoung lady, a word like that.”
“Go away! You’re a creature for sale!” screamed Katerina Ivanovna. Everyfeature was working in her utterly distorted face.
“For sale indeed! You used to visit gentlemen in the dusk for money once;you brought your beauty for sale. You see, I know.”
Katerina Ivanovna shrieked, and would have rushed at her, but Alyosha heldher with all his strength.
“Not a step, not a word! Don’t speak, don’t answer her. She’ll goaway—she’ll go at once.”
At that instant Katerina Ivanovna’s two aunts ran in at her cry, and withthem a maid‐servant. All hurried to her.
“I will go away,” said Grushenka, taking up her mantle from the sofa.“Alyosha, darling, see me home!”
“Go away—go away, make haste!” cried Alyosha, clasping his handsimploringly.
“Dear little Alyosha, see me home! I’ve got a pretty little story to tellyou on the way. I got up this scene for your benefit, Alyosha. See mehome, dear, you’ll be glad of it afterwards.”
Alyosha turned away, wringing his hands. Grushenka ran out of the house,laughing musically.
Katerina Ivanovna went into a fit of hysterics. She sobbed, and was shakenwith convulsions. Every one fussed round her.
“I warned you,” said the elder of her aunts. “I tried to prevent yourdoing this. You’re too impulsive. How could you do such a thing? You don’tknow these creatures, and they say she’s worse than any of them. You aretoo self‐willed.”
“She’s a tigress!” yelled Katerina Ivanovna. “Why did you hold me, AlexeyFyodorovitch? I’d have beaten her—beaten her!”
She could not control herself before Alyosha; perhaps she did not care to,indeed.
“She ought to be flogged in public on a scaffold!”
Alyosha withdrew towards the door.
“But, my God!” cried Katerina Ivanovna, clasping her hands. “He! He! Hecould be so dishonorable, so inhuman! Why, he told that creature whathappened on that fatal, accursed day! ‘You brought your beauty for sale,dear young lady.’ She knows it! Your brother’s a scoundrel, AlexeyFyodorovitch.”
Alyosha wanted to say something, but he couldn’t find a word. His heartached.
“Go away, Alexey Fyodorovitch! It’s shameful, it’s awful for me! To‐morrow, I beg you on my knees, come to‐morrow. Don’t condemn me. Forgiveme. I don’t know what I shall do with myself now!”
Alyosha walked out into the street reeling. He could have wept as she did.Suddenly he was overtaken by the maid.
“The young lady forgot to give you this letter from Madame Hohlakov; it’sbeen left with us since dinner‐time.”
Alyosha took the little pink envelope mechanically and put it, almostunconsciously, into his pocket.


Chapter XI. Another Reputation Ruined

It was not much more than three‐quarters of a mile from the town to themonastery. Alyosha walked quickly along the road, at that hour deserted.It was almost night, and too dark to see anything clearly at thirty pacesahead. There were cross‐roads half‐way. A figure came into sight under asolitary willow at the cross‐roads. As soon as Alyosha reached the cross‐roads the figure moved out and rushed at him, shouting savagely:
“Your money or your life!”
“So it’s you, Mitya,” cried Alyosha, in surprise, violently startledhowever.
“Ha ha ha! You didn’t expect me? I wondered where to wait for you. By herhouse? There are three ways from it, and I might have missed you. At lastI thought of waiting here, for you had to pass here, there’s no other wayto the monastery. Come, tell me the truth. Crush me like a beetle. Butwhat’s the matter?”
“Nothing, brother—it’s the fright you gave me. Oh, Dmitri! Father’s bloodjust now.” (Alyosha began to cry, he had been on the verge of tears for along time, and now something seemed to snap in his soul.) “You almostkilled him—cursed him—and now—here—you’re making jokes—‘Your money or yourlife!’ ”
“Well, what of that? It’s not seemly—is that it? Not suitable in myposition?”
“No—I only—”
“Stay. Look at the night. You see what a dark night, what clouds, what awind has risen. I hid here under the willow waiting for you. And as God’sabove, I suddenly thought, why go on in misery any longer, what is thereto wait for? Here I have a willow, a handkerchief, a shirt, I can twistthem into a rope in a minute, and braces besides, and why go on burdeningthe earth, dishonoring it with my vile presence? And then I heard youcoming—Heavens, it was as though something flew down to me suddenly. Sothere is a man, then, whom I love. Here he is, that man, my dear littlebrother, whom I love more than any one in the world, the only one I lovein the world. And I loved you so much, so much at that moment that Ithought, ‘I’ll fall on his neck at once.’ Then a stupid idea struck me, tohave a joke with you and scare you. I shouted, like a fool, ‘Your money!’Forgive my foolery—it was only nonsense, and there’s nothing unseemly inmy soul.... Damn it all, tell me what’s happened. What did she say? Strikeme, crush me, don’t spare me! Was she furious?”
“No, not that.... There was nothing like that, Mitya. There—I found themboth there.”
“Both? Whom?”
“Grushenka at Katerina Ivanovna’s.”
Dmitri was struck dumb.
“Impossible!” he cried. “You’re raving! Grushenka with her?”
Alyosha described all that had happened from the moment he went in toKaterina Ivanovna’s. He was ten minutes telling his story. He can’t besaid to have told it fluently and consecutively, but he seemed to make itclear, not omitting any word or action of significance, and vividlydescribing, often in one word, his own sensations. Dmitri listened insilence, gazing at him with a terrible fixed stare, but it was clear toAlyosha that he understood it all, and had grasped every point. But as thestory went on, his face became not merely gloomy, but menacing. Hescowled, he clenched his teeth, and his fixed stare became still morerigid, more concentrated, more terrible, when suddenly, with incrediblerapidity, his wrathful, savage face changed, his tightly compressed lipsparted, and Dmitri Fyodorovitch broke into uncontrolled, spontaneouslaughter. He literally shook with laughter. For a long time he could notspeak.
“So she wouldn’t kiss her hand! So she didn’t kiss it; so she ran away!”he kept exclaiming with hysterical delight; insolent delight it might havebeen called, if it had not been so spontaneous. “So the other one calledher tigress! And a tigress she is! So she ought to be flogged on ascaffold? Yes, yes, so she ought. That’s just what I think; she ought tohave been long ago. It’s like this, brother, let her be punished, but Imust get better first. I understand the queen of impudence. That’s her allover! You saw her all over in that hand‐kissing, the she‐devil! She’smagnificent in her own line! So she ran home? I’ll go—ah—I’ll run to her!Alyosha, don’t blame me, I agree that hanging is too good for her.”
“But Katerina Ivanovna!” exclaimed Alyosha sorrowfully.
“I see her, too! I see right through her, as I’ve never done before! It’sa regular discovery of the four continents of the world, that is, of thefive! What a thing to do! That’s just like Katya, who was not afraid toface a coarse, unmannerly officer and risk a deadly insult on a generousimpulse to save her father! But the pride, the recklessness, the defianceof fate, the unbounded defiance! You say that aunt tried to stop her? Thataunt, you know, is overbearing, herself. She’s the sister of the general’swidow in Moscow, and even more stuck‐up than she. But her husband wascaught stealing government money. He lost everything, his estate and all,and the proud wife had to lower her colors, and hasn’t raised them since.So she tried to prevent Katya, but she wouldn’t listen to her! She thinksshe can overcome everything, that everything will give way to her. Shethought she could bewitch Grushenka if she liked, and she believed itherself: she plays a part to herself, and whose fault is it? Do you thinkshe kissed Grushenka’s hand first, on purpose, with a motive? No, shereally was fascinated by Grushenka, that’s to say, not by Grushenka, butby her own dream, her own delusion—because it was _her_ dream, _her_delusion! Alyosha, darling, how did you escape from them, those women? Didyou pick up your cassock and run? Ha ha ha!”
“Brother, you don’t seem to have noticed how you’ve insulted KaterinaIvanovna by telling Grushenka about that day. And she flung it in her facejust now that she had gone to gentlemen in secret to sell her beauty!Brother, what could be worse than that insult?”
What worried Alyosha more than anything was that, incredible as it seemed,his brother appeared pleased at Katerina Ivanovna’s humiliation.
“Bah!” Dmitri frowned fiercely, and struck his forehead with his hand. Heonly now realized it, though Alyosha had just told him of the insult, andKaterina Ivanovna’s cry: “Your brother is a scoundrel!”
“Yes, perhaps, I really did tell Grushenka about that ‘fatal day,’ asKatya calls it. Yes, I did tell her, I remember! It was that time atMokroe. I was drunk, the gypsies were singing.... But I was sobbing. I wassobbing then, kneeling and praying to Katya’s image, and Grushenkaunderstood it. She understood it all then. I remember, she criedherself.... Damn it all! But it’s bound to be so now.... Then she cried,but now ‘the dagger in the heart’! That’s how women are.”
He looked down and sank into thought.
“Yes, I am a scoundrel, a thorough scoundrel!” he said suddenly, in agloomy voice. “It doesn’t matter whether I cried or not, I’m a scoundrel!Tell her I accept the name, if that’s any comfort. Come, that’s enough.Good‐by. It’s no use talking! It’s not amusing. You go your way and Imine. And I don’t want to see you again except as a last resource. Good‐by, Alexey!”
He warmly pressed Alyosha’s hand, and still looking down, without raisinghis head, as though tearing himself away, turned rapidly towards the town.
Alyosha looked after him, unable to believe he would go away so abruptly.
“Stay, Alexey, one more confession to you alone!” cried Dmitri, suddenlyturning back. “Look at me. Look at me well. You see here, here—there’sterrible disgrace in store for me.” (As he said “here,” Dmitri struck hischest with his fist with a strange air, as though the dishonor layprecisely on his chest, in some spot, in a pocket, perhaps, or hanginground his neck.) “You know me now, a scoundrel, an avowed scoundrel, butlet me tell you that I’ve never done anything before and never shallagain, anything that can compare in baseness with the dishonor which Ibear now at this very minute on my breast, here, here, which will come topass, though I’m perfectly free to stop it. I can stop it or carry itthrough, note that. Well, let me tell you, I shall carry it through. Ishan’t stop it. I told you everything just now, but I didn’t tell youthis, because even I had not brass enough for it. I can still pull up; ifI do, I can give back the full half of my lost honor to‐morrow. But Ishan’t pull up. I shall carry out my base plan, and you can bear witnessthat I told you so beforehand. Darkness and destruction! No need toexplain. You’ll find out in due time. The filthy back‐alley and the she‐devil. Good‐by. Don’t pray for me, I’m not worth it. And there’s no need,no need at all.... I don’t need it! Away!”
And he suddenly retreated, this time finally. Alyosha went towards themonastery.
“What? I shall never see him again! What is he saying?” he wonderedwildly. “Why, I shall certainly see him to‐morrow. I shall look him up. Ishall make a point of it. What does he mean?”
                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
He went round the monastery, and crossed the pine‐wood to the hermitage.The door was opened to him, though no one was admitted at that hour. Therewas a tremor in his heart as he went into Father Zossima’s cell.
“Why, why, had he gone forth? Why had he sent him into the world? Here waspeace. Here was holiness. But there was confusion, there was darkness inwhich one lost one’s way and went astray at once....”
In the cell he found the novice Porfiry and Father Païssy, who came everyhour to inquire after Father Zossima. Alyosha learnt with alarm that hewas getting worse and worse. Even his usual discourse with the brotherscould not take place that day. As a rule every evening after service themonks flocked into Father Zossima’s cell, and all confessed aloud theirsins of the day, their sinful thoughts and temptations; even theirdisputes, if there had been any. Some confessed kneeling. The elderabsolved, reconciled, exhorted, imposed penance, blessed, and dismissedthem. It was against this general “confession” that the opponents of“elders” protested, maintaining that it was a profanation of the sacramentof confession, almost a sacrilege, though this was quite a differentthing. They even represented to the diocesan authorities that suchconfessions attained no good object, but actually to a large extent led tosin and temptation. Many of the brothers disliked going to the elder, andwent against their own will because every one went, and for fear theyshould be accused of pride and rebellious ideas. People said that some ofthe monks agreed beforehand, saying, “I’ll confess I lost my temper withyou this morning, and you confirm it,” simply in order to have somethingto say. Alyosha knew that this actually happened sometimes. He knew, too,that there were among the monks some who deeply resented the fact thatletters from relations were habitually taken to the elder, to be openedand read by him before those to whom they were addressed.
It was assumed, of course, that all this was done freely, and in goodfaith, by way of voluntary submission and salutary guidance. But, in fact,there was sometimes no little insincerity, and much that was false andstrained in this practice. Yet the older and more experienced of the monksadhered to their opinion, arguing that “for those who have come withinthese walls sincerely seeking salvation, such obedience and sacrifice willcertainly be salutary and of great benefit; those, on the other hand, whofind it irksome, and repine, are no true monks, and have made a mistake inentering the monastery—their proper place is in the world. Even in thetemple one cannot be safe from sin and the devil. So it was no good takingit too much into account.”
“He is weaker, a drowsiness has come over him,” Father Païssy whispered toAlyosha, as he blessed him. “It’s difficult to rouse him. And he must notbe roused. He waked up for five minutes, sent his blessing to thebrothers, and begged their prayers for him at night. He intends to takethe sacrament again in the morning. He remembered you, Alexey. He askedwhether you had gone away, and was told that you were in the town. ‘Iblessed him for that work,’ he said, ‘his place is there, not here, forawhile.’ Those were his words about you. He remembered you lovingly, withanxiety; do you understand how he honored you? But how is it that he hasdecided that you shall spend some time in the world? He must have foreseensomething in your destiny! Understand, Alexey, that if you return to theworld, it must be to do the duty laid upon you by your elder, and not forfrivolous vanity and worldly pleasures.”
Father Païssy went out. Alyosha had no doubt that Father Zossima wasdying, though he might live another day or two. Alyosha firmly andardently resolved that in spite of his promises to his father, theHohlakovs, and Katerina Ivanovna, he would not leave the monastery nextday, but would remain with his elder to the end. His heart glowed withlove, and he reproached himself bitterly for having been able for oneinstant to forget him whom he had left in the monastery on his deathbed,and whom he honored above every one in the world. He went into FatherZossima’s bedroom, knelt down, and bowed to the ground before the elder,who slept quietly without stirring, with regular, hardly audible breathingand a peaceful face.
Alyosha returned to the other room, where Father Zossima had received hisguests in the morning. Taking off his boots, he lay down on the hard,narrow, leathern sofa, which he had long used as a bed, bringing nothingbut a pillow. The mattress, about which his father had shouted to him thatmorning, he had long forgotten to lie on. He took off his cassock, whichhe used as a covering. But before going to bed, he fell on his knees andprayed a long time. In his fervent prayer he did not beseech God tolighten his darkness but only thirsted for the joyous emotion, whichalways visited his soul after the praise and adoration, of which hisevening prayer usually consisted. That joy always brought him lightuntroubled sleep. As he was praying, he suddenly felt in his pocket thelittle pink note the servant had handed him as he left KaterinaIvanovna’s. He was disturbed, but finished his prayer. Then, after somehesitation, he opened the envelope. In it was a letter to him, signed byLise, the young daughter of Madame Hohlakov, who had laughed at him beforethe elder in the morning.
“Alexey Fyodorovitch,” she wrote, “I am writing to you without any one’sknowledge, even mamma’s, and I know how wrong it is. But I cannot livewithout telling you the feeling that has sprung up in my heart, and thisno one but us two must know for a time. But how am I to say what I want somuch to tell you? Paper, they say, does not blush, but I assure you it’snot true and that it’s blushing just as I am now, all over. Dear Alyosha,I love you, I’ve loved you from my childhood, since our Moscow days, whenyou were very different from what you are now, and I shall love you all mylife. My heart has chosen you, to unite our lives, and pass them togethertill our old age. Of course, on condition that you will leave themonastery. As for our age we will wait for the time fixed by the law. Bythat time I shall certainly be quite strong, I shall be walking anddancing. There can be no doubt of that.
“You see how I’ve thought of everything. There’s only one thing I can’timagine: what you’ll think of me when you read this. I’m always laughingand being naughty. I made you angry this morning, but I assure you beforeI took up my pen, I prayed before the Image of the Mother of God, and nowI’m praying, and almost crying.
“My secret is in your hands. When you come to‐morrow, I don’t know how Ishall look at you. Ah, Alexey Fyodorovitch, what if I can’t restrainmyself like a silly and laugh when I look at you as I did to‐day. You’llthink I’m a nasty girl making fun of you, and you won’t believe my letter.And so I beg you, dear one, if you’ve any pity for me, when you come to‐morrow, don’t look me straight in the face, for if I meet your eyes, itwill be sure to make me laugh, especially as you’ll be in that long gown.I feel cold all over when I think of it, so when you come, don’t look atme at all for a time, look at mamma or at the window....
“Here I’ve written you a love‐letter. Oh, dear, what have I done? Alyosha,don’t despise me, and if I’ve done something very horrid and wounded you,forgive me. Now the secret of my reputation, ruined perhaps for ever, isin your hands.
“I shall certainly cry to‐day. Good‐by till our meeting, our _awful_meeting.—LISE.
“P.S.—Alyosha! You must, must, must come!—LISE.”
Alyosha read the note in amazement, read it through twice, thought alittle, and suddenly laughed a soft, sweet laugh. He started. That laughseemed to him sinful. But a minute later he laughed again just as softlyand happily. He slowly replaced the note in the envelope, crossed himselfand lay down. The agitation in his heart passed at once. “God, have mercyupon all of them, have all these unhappy and turbulent souls in Thykeeping, and set them in the right path. All ways are Thine. Save themaccording to Thy wisdom. Thou art love. Thou wilt send joy to all!”Alyosha murmured, crossing himself, and falling into peaceful sleep.




PART II



Book IV. Lacerations


Chapter I. Father Ferapont

Alyosha was roused early, before daybreak. Father Zossima woke up feelingvery weak, though he wanted to get out of bed and sit up in a chair. Hismind was quite clear; his face looked very tired, yet bright and almostjoyful. It wore an expression of gayety, kindness and cordiality. “Maybe Ishall not live through the coming day,” he said to Alyosha. Then hedesired to confess and take the sacrament at once. He always confessed toFather Païssy. After taking the communion, the service of extreme unctionfollowed. The monks assembled and the cell was gradually filled up by theinmates of the hermitage. Meantime it was daylight. People began comingfrom the monastery. After the service was over the elder desired to kissand take leave of every one. As the cell was so small the earlier visitorswithdrew to make room for others. Alyosha stood beside the elder, who wasseated again in his arm‐chair. He talked as much as he could. Though hisvoice was weak, it was fairly steady.
“I’ve been teaching you so many years, and therefore I’ve been talkingaloud so many years, that I’ve got into the habit of talking, and so muchso that it’s almost more difficult for me to hold my tongue than to talk,even now, in spite of my weakness, dear Fathers and brothers,” he jested,looking with emotion at the group round him.
Alyosha remembered afterwards something of what he said to them. Butthough he spoke out distinctly and his voice was fairly steady, his speechwas somewhat disconnected. He spoke of many things, he seemed anxiousbefore the moment of death to say everything he had not said in his life,and not simply for the sake of instructing them, but as though thirstingto share with all men and all creation his joy and ecstasy, and once morein his life to open his whole heart.
“Love one another, Fathers,” said Father Zossima, as far as Alyosha couldremember afterwards. “Love God’s people. Because we have come here andshut ourselves within these walls, we are no holier than those that areoutside, but on the contrary, from the very fact of coming here, each ofus has confessed to himself that he is worse than others, than all men onearth.... And the longer the monk lives in his seclusion, the more keenlyhe must recognize that. Else he would have had no reason to come here.When he realizes that he is not only worse than others, but that he isresponsible to all men for all and everything, for all human sins,national and individual, only then the aim of our seclusion is attained.For know, dear ones, that every one of us is undoubtedly responsible forall men and everything on earth, not merely through the general sinfulnessof creation, but each one personally for all mankind and every individualman. This knowledge is the crown of life for the monk and for every man.For monks are not a special sort of men, but only what all men ought tobe. Only through that knowledge, our heart grows soft with infinite,universal, inexhaustible love. Then every one of you will have the powerto win over the whole world by love and to wash away the sins of the worldwith your tears.... Each of you keep watch over your heart and confessyour sins to yourself unceasingly. Be not afraid of your sins, even whenperceiving them, if only there be penitence, but make no conditions withGod. Again I say, Be not proud. Be proud neither to the little nor to thegreat. Hate not those who reject you, who insult you, who abuse andslander you. Hate not the atheists, the teachers of evil, thematerialists—and I mean not only the good ones—for there are many goodones among them, especially in our day—hate not even the wicked ones.Remember them in your prayers thus: Save, O Lord, all those who have noneto pray for them, save too all those who will not pray. And add: it is notin pride that I make this prayer, O Lord, for I am lower than all men....Love God’s people, let not strangers draw away the flock, for if youslumber in your slothfulness and disdainful pride, or worse still, incovetousness, they will come from all sides and draw away your flock.Expound the Gospel to the people unceasingly ... be not extortionate....Do not love gold and silver, do not hoard them.... Have faith. Cling tothe banner and raise it on high.”
But the elder spoke more disconnectedly than Alyosha reported his wordsafterwards. Sometimes he broke off altogether, as though to take breath,and recover his strength, but he was in a sort of ecstasy. They heard himwith emotion, though many wondered at his words and found them obscure....Afterwards all remembered those words.
When Alyosha happened for a moment to leave the cell, he was struck by thegeneral excitement and suspense in the monks who were crowding about it.This anticipation showed itself in some by anxiety, in others by devoutsolemnity. All were expecting that some marvel would happen immediatelyafter the elder’s death. Their suspense was, from one point of view,almost frivolous, but even the most austere of the monks were affected byit. Father Païssy’s face looked the gravest of all.
Alyosha was mysteriously summoned by a monk to see Rakitin, who hadarrived from town with a singular letter for him from Madame Hohlakov. Init she informed Alyosha of a strange and very opportune incident. Itappeared that among the women who had come on the previous day to receiveFather Zossima’s blessing, there had been an old woman from the town, asergeant’s widow, called Prohorovna. She had inquired whether she mightpray for the rest of the soul of her son, Vassenka, who had gone toIrkutsk, and had sent her no news for over a year. To which Father Zossimahad answered sternly, forbidding her to do so, and saying that to pray forthe living as though they were dead was a kind of sorcery. He afterwardsforgave her on account of her ignorance, and added, “as though reading thebook of the future” (this was Madame Hohlakov’s expression), words ofcomfort: “that her son Vassya was certainly alive and he would either comehimself very shortly or send a letter, and that she was to go home andexpect him.” And “Would you believe it?” exclaimed Madame Hohlakoventhusiastically, “the prophecy has been fulfilled literally indeed, andmore than that.” Scarcely had the old woman reached home when they gaveher a letter from Siberia which had been awaiting her. But that was notall; in the letter written on the road from Ekaterinenburg, Vassyainformed his mother that he was returning to Russia with an official, andthat three weeks after her receiving the letter he hoped “to embrace hismother.”
Madame Hohlakov warmly entreated Alyosha to report this new “miracle ofprediction” to the Superior and all the brotherhood. “All, all, ought toknow of it!” she concluded. The letter had been written in haste, theexcitement of the writer was apparent in every line of it. But Alyosha hadno need to tell the monks, for all knew of it already. Rakitin hadcommissioned the monk who brought his message “to inform most respectfullyhis reverence Father Païssy, that he, Rakitin, has a matter to speak ofwith him, of such gravity that he dare not defer it for a moment, andhumbly begs forgiveness for his presumption.” As the monk had given themessage to Father Païssy before that to Alyosha, the latter found afterreading the letter, there was nothing left for him to do but to hand it toFather Païssy in confirmation of the story.
And even that austere and cautious man, though he frowned as he read thenews of the “miracle,” could not completely restrain some inner emotion.His eyes gleamed, and a grave and solemn smile came into his lips.
“We shall see greater things!” broke from him.
“We shall see greater things, greater things yet!” the monks aroundrepeated.
But Father Païssy, frowning again, begged all of them, at least for atime, not to speak of the matter “till it be more fully confirmed, seeingthere is so much credulity among those of this world, and indeed thismight well have chanced naturally,” he added, prudently, as it were tosatisfy his conscience, though scarcely believing his own disavowal, afact his listeners very clearly perceived.
Within the hour the “miracle” was of course known to the whole monastery,and many visitors who had come for the mass. No one seemed more impressedby it than the monk who had come the day before from St. Sylvester, fromthe little monastery of Obdorsk in the far North. It was he who had beenstanding near Madame Hohlakov the previous day and had asked FatherZossima earnestly, referring to the “healing” of the lady’s daughter, “Howcan you presume to do such things?”
He was now somewhat puzzled and did not know whom to believe. The eveningbefore he had visited Father Ferapont in his cell apart, behind theapiary, and had been greatly impressed and overawed by the visit. ThisFather Ferapont was that aged monk so devout in fasting and observingsilence who has been mentioned already, as antagonistic to Father Zossimaand the whole institution of “elders,” which he regarded as a perniciousand frivolous innovation. He was a very formidable opponent, although fromhis practice of silence he scarcely spoke a word to any one. What made himformidable was that a number of monks fully shared his feeling, and manyof the visitors looked upon him as a great saint and ascetic, althoughthey had no doubt that he was crazy. But it was just his crazinessattracted them.
Father Ferapont never went to see the elder. Though he lived in thehermitage they did not worry him to keep its regulations, and this toobecause he behaved as though he were crazy. He was seventy‐five or more,and he lived in a corner beyond the apiary in an old decaying wooden cellwhich had been built long ago for another great ascetic, Father Iona, whohad lived to be a hundred and five, and of whose saintly doings manycurious stories were still extant in the monastery and the neighborhood.
Father Ferapont had succeeded in getting himself installed in this samesolitary cell seven years previously. It was simply a peasant’s hut,though it looked like a chapel, for it contained an extraordinary numberof ikons with lamps perpetually burning before them—which men brought tothe monastery as offerings to God. Father Ferapont had been appointed tolook after them and keep the lamps burning. It was said (and indeed it wastrue) that he ate only two pounds of bread in three days. The beekeeper,who lived close by the apiary, used to bring him the bread every threedays, and even to this man who waited upon him, Father Ferapont rarelyuttered a word. The four pounds of bread, together with the sacramentbread, regularly sent him on Sundays after the late mass by the FatherSuperior, made up his weekly rations. The water in his jug was changedevery day. He rarely appeared at mass. Visitors who came to do him homagesaw him sometimes kneeling all day long at prayer without looking round.If he addressed them, he was brief, abrupt, strange, and almost alwaysrude. On very rare occasions, however, he would talk to visitors, but forthe most part he would utter some one strange saying which was a completeriddle, and no entreaties would induce him to pronounce a word inexplanation. He was not a priest, but a simple monk. There was a strangebelief, chiefly however among the most ignorant, that Father Ferapont hadcommunication with heavenly spirits and would only converse with them, andso was silent with men.
The monk from Obdorsk, having been directed to the apiary by thebeekeeper, who was also a very silent and surly monk, went to the cornerwhere Father Ferapont’s cell stood. “Maybe he will speak as you are astranger and maybe you’ll get nothing out of him,” the beekeeper hadwarned him. The monk, as he related afterwards, approached in the utmostapprehension. It was rather late in the evening. Father Ferapont wassitting at the door of his cell on a low bench. A huge old elm was lightlyrustling overhead. There was an evening freshness in the air. The monkfrom Obdorsk bowed down before the saint and asked his blessing.
“Do you want me to bow down to you, monk?” said Father Ferapont. “Get up!”
The monk got up.
“Blessing, be blessed! Sit beside me. Where have you come from?”
What most struck the poor monk was the fact that in spite of his strictfasting and great age, Father Ferapont still looked a vigorous old man. Hewas tall, held himself erect, and had a thin, but fresh and healthy face.There was no doubt he still had considerable strength. He was of athleticbuild. In spite of his great age he was not even quite gray, and still hadvery thick hair and a full beard, both of which had once been black. Hiseyes were gray, large and luminous, but strikingly prominent. He spokewith a broad accent. He was dressed in a peasant’s long reddish coat ofcoarse convict cloth (as it used to be called) and had a stout rope roundhis waist. His throat and chest were bare. Beneath his coat, his shirt ofthe coarsest linen showed almost black with dirt, not having been changedfor months. They said that he wore irons weighing thirty pounds under hiscoat. His stockingless feet were thrust in old slippers almost dropping topieces.
“From the little Obdorsk monastery, from St. Sylvester,” the monk answeredhumbly, whilst his keen and inquisitive, but rather frightened little eyeskept watch on the hermit.
“I have been at your Sylvester’s. I used to stay there. Is Sylvesterwell?”
The monk hesitated.
“You are a senseless lot! How do you keep the fasts?”
“Our dietary is according to the ancient conventual rules. During Lentthere are no meals provided for Monday, Wednesday, and Friday. For Tuesdayand Thursday we have white bread, stewed fruit with honey, wild berries,or salt cabbage and wholemeal stirabout. On Saturday white cabbage soup,noodles with peas, kasha, all with hemp oil. On weekdays we have driedfish and kasha with the cabbage soup. From Monday till Saturday evening,six whole days in Holy Week, nothing is cooked, and we have only bread andwater, and that sparingly; if possible not taking food every day, just thesame as is ordered for first week in Lent. On Good Friday nothing iseaten. In the same way on the Saturday we have to fast till three o’clock,and then take a little bread and water and drink a single cup of wine. OnHoly Thursday we drink wine and have something cooked without oil or notcooked at all, inasmuch as the Laodicean council lays down for HolyThursday: ‘It is unseemly by remitting the fast on the Holy Thursday todishonor the whole of Lent!’ This is how we keep the fast. But what isthat compared with you, holy Father,” added the monk, growing moreconfident, “for all the year round, even at Easter, you take nothing butbread and water, and what we should eat in two days lasts you full seven.It’s truly marvelous—your great abstinence.”
“And mushrooms?” asked Father Ferapont, suddenly.
“Mushrooms?” repeated the surprised monk.
“Yes. I can give up their bread, not needing it at all, and go away intothe forest and live there on the mushrooms or the berries, but they can’tgive up their bread here, wherefore they are in bondage to the devil.Nowadays the unclean deny that there is need of such fasting. Haughty andunclean is their judgment.”
“Och, true,” sighed the monk.
“And have you seen devils among them?” asked Ferapont.
“Among them? Among whom?” asked the monk, timidly.
“I went to the Father Superior on Trinity Sunday last year, I haven’t beensince. I saw a devil sitting on one man’s chest hiding under his cassock,only his horns poked out; another had one peeping out of his pocket withsuch sharp eyes, he was afraid of me; another settled in the unclean bellyof one, another was hanging round a man’s neck, and so he was carrying himabout without seeing him.”
“You—can see spirits?” the monk inquired.
“I tell you I can see, I can see through them. When I was coming out fromthe Superior’s I saw one hiding from me behind the door, and a big one, ayard and a half or more high, with a thick long gray tail, and the tip ofhis tail was in the crack of the door and I was quick and slammed thedoor, pinching his tail in it. He squealed and began to struggle, and Imade the sign of the cross over him three times. And he died on the spotlike a crushed spider. He must have rotted there in the corner and bestinking, but they don’t see, they don’t smell it. It’s a year since Ihave been there. I reveal it to you, as you are a stranger.”
“Your words are terrible! But, holy and blessed Father,” said the monk,growing bolder and bolder, “is it true, as they noise abroad even todistant lands about you, that you are in continual communication with theHoly Ghost?”
“He does fly down at times.”
“How does he fly down? In what form?”
“As a bird.”
“The Holy Ghost in the form of a dove?”
“There’s the Holy Ghost and there’s the Holy Spirit. The Holy Spirit canappear as other birds—sometimes as a swallow, sometimes a goldfinch andsometimes as a blue‐tit.”
“How do you know him from an ordinary tit?”
“He speaks.”
“How does he speak, in what language?”
“Human language.”
“And what does he tell you?”
“Why, to‐day he told me that a fool would visit me and would ask meunseemly questions. You want to know too much, monk.”
“Terrible are your words, most holy and blessed Father,” the monk shookhis head. But there was a doubtful look in his frightened little eyes.
“Do you see this tree?” asked Father Ferapont, after a pause.
“I do, blessed Father.”
“You think it’s an elm, but for me it has another shape.”
“What sort of shape?” inquired the monk, after a pause of vainexpectation.
“It happens at night. You see those two branches? In the night it isChrist holding out His arms to me and seeking me with those arms, I see itclearly and tremble. It’s terrible, terrible!”
“What is there terrible if it’s Christ Himself?”
“Why, He’ll snatch me up and carry me away.”
“Alive?”
“In the spirit and glory of Elijah, haven’t you heard? He will take me inHis arms and bear me away.”
Though the monk returned to the cell he was sharing with one of thebrothers, in considerable perplexity of mind, he still cherished at hearta greater reverence for Father Ferapont than for Father Zossima. He wasstrongly in favor of fasting, and it was not strange that one who kept sorigid a fast as Father Ferapont should “see marvels.” His words seemedcertainly queer, but God only could tell what was hidden in those words,and were not worse words and acts commonly seen in those who havesacrificed their intellects for the glory of God? The pinching of thedevil’s tail he was ready and eager to believe, and not only in thefigurative sense. Besides he had, before visiting the monastery, a strongprejudice against the institution of “elders,” which he only knew of byhearsay and believed to be a pernicious innovation. Before he had beenlong at the monastery, he had detected the secret murmurings of someshallow brothers who disliked the institution. He was, besides, ameddlesome, inquisitive man, who poked his nose into everything. This waswhy the news of the fresh “miracle” performed by Father Zossima reducedhim to extreme perplexity. Alyosha remembered afterwards how theirinquisitive guest from Obdorsk had been continually flitting to and frofrom one group to another, listening and asking questions among the monksthat were crowding within and without the elder’s cell. But he did not paymuch attention to him at the time, and only recollected it afterwards.
He had no thought to spare for it indeed, for when Father Zossima, feelingtired again, had gone back to bed, he thought of Alyosha as he was closinghis eyes, and sent for him. Alyosha ran at once. There was no one else inthe cell but Father Païssy, Father Iosif, and the novice Porfiry. Theelder, opening his weary eyes and looking intently at Alyosha, asked himsuddenly:
“Are your people expecting you, my son?”
Alyosha hesitated.
“Haven’t they need of you? Didn’t you promise some one yesterday to seethem to‐day?”
“I did promise—to my father—my brothers—others too.”
“You see, you must go. Don’t grieve. Be sure I shall not die without yourbeing by to hear my last word. To you I will say that word, my son, itwill be my last gift to you. To you, dear son, because you love me. Butnow go to keep your promise.”
Alyosha immediately obeyed, though it was hard to go. But the promise thathe should hear his last word on earth, that it should be the last gift tohim, Alyosha, sent a thrill of rapture through his soul. He made hastethat he might finish what he had to do in the town and return quickly.Father Païssy, too, uttered some words of exhortation which moved andsurprised him greatly. He spoke as they left the cell together.
“Remember, young man, unceasingly,” Father Païssy began, without preface,“that the science of this world, which has become a great power, has,especially in the last century, analyzed everything divine handed down tous in the holy books. After this cruel analysis the learned of this worldhave nothing left of all that was sacred of old. But they have onlyanalyzed the parts and overlooked the whole, and indeed their blindness ismarvelous. Yet the whole still stands steadfast before their eyes, and thegates of hell shall not prevail against it. Has it not lasted nineteencenturies, is it not still a living, a moving power in the individual souland in the masses of people? It is still as strong and living even in thesouls of atheists, who have destroyed everything! For even those who haverenounced Christianity and attack it, in their inmost being still followthe Christian ideal, for hitherto neither their subtlety nor the ardor oftheir hearts has been able to create a higher ideal of man and of virtuethan the ideal given by Christ of old. When it has been attempted, theresult has been only grotesque. Remember this especially, young man, sinceyou are being sent into the world by your departing elder. Maybe,remembering this great day, you will not forget my words, uttered from theheart for your guidance, seeing you are young, and the temptations of theworld are great and beyond your strength to endure. Well, now go, myorphan.”
With these words Father Païssy blessed him. As Alyosha left the monasteryand thought them over, he suddenly realized that he had met a new andunexpected friend, a warmly loving teacher, in this austere monk who hadhitherto treated him sternly. It was as though Father Zossima hadbequeathed him to him at his death, and “perhaps that’s just what hadpassed between them,” Alyosha thought suddenly. The philosophicreflections he had just heard so unexpectedly testified to the warmth ofFather Païssy’s heart. He was in haste to arm the boy’s mind for conflictwith temptation and to guard the young soul left in his charge with thestrongest defense he could imagine.


Chapter II. At His Father’s

First of all, Alyosha went to his father. On the way he remembered thathis father had insisted the day before that he should come without hisbrother Ivan seeing him. “Why so?” Alyosha wondered suddenly. “Even if myfather has something to say to me alone, why should I go in unseen? Mostlikely in his excitement yesterday he meant to say something different,”he decided. Yet he was very glad when Marfa Ignatyevna, who opened thegarden gate to him (Grigory, it appeared, was ill in bed in the lodge),told him in answer to his question that Ivan Fyodorovitch had gone out twohours ago.
“And my father?”
“He is up, taking his coffee,” Marfa answered somewhat dryly.
Alyosha went in. The old man was sitting alone at the table wearingslippers and a little old overcoat. He was amusing himself by lookingthrough some accounts, rather inattentively however. He was quite alone inthe house, for Smerdyakov too had gone out marketing. Though he had got upearly and was trying to put a bold face on it, he looked tired and weak.His forehead, upon which huge purple bruises had come out during thenight, was bandaged with a red handkerchief; his nose too had swollenterribly in the night, and some smaller bruises covered it in patches,giving his whole face a peculiarly spiteful and irritable look. The oldman was aware of this, and turned a hostile glance on Alyosha as he camein.
“The coffee is cold,” he cried harshly; “I won’t offer you any. I’veordered nothing but a Lenten fish soup to‐day, and I don’t invite any oneto share it. Why have you come?”
“To find out how you are,” said Alyosha.
“Yes. Besides, I told you to come yesterday. It’s all of no consequence.You need not have troubled. But I knew you’d come poking in directly.”
He said this with almost hostile feeling. At the same time he got up andlooked anxiously in the looking‐glass (perhaps for the fortieth time thatmorning) at his nose. He began, too, binding his red handkerchief morebecomingly on his forehead.
“Red’s better. It’s just like the hospital in a white one,” he observedsententiously. “Well, how are things over there? How is your elder?”
“He is very bad; he may die to‐day,” answered Alyosha. But his father hadnot listened, and had forgotten his own question at once.
“Ivan’s gone out,” he said suddenly. “He is doing his utmost to carry offMitya’s betrothed. That’s what he is staying here for,” he addedmaliciously, and, twisting his mouth, looked at Alyosha.
“Surely he did not tell you so?” asked Alyosha.
“Yes, he did, long ago. Would you believe it, he told me three weeks ago?You don’t suppose he too came to murder me, do you? He must have had someobject in coming.”
“What do you mean? Why do you say such things?” said Alyosha, troubled.
“He doesn’t ask for money, it’s true, but yet he won’t get a farthing fromme. I intend living as long as possible, you may as well know, my dearAlexey Fyodorovitch, and so I need every farthing, and the longer I live,the more I shall need it,” he continued, pacing from one corner of theroom to the other, keeping his hands in the pockets of his loose greasyovercoat made of yellow cotton material. “I can still pass for a man atfive and fifty, but I want to pass for one for another twenty years. As Iget older, you know, I shan’t be a pretty object. The wenches won’t cometo me of their own accord, so I shall want my money. So I am saving upmore and more, simply for myself, my dear son Alexey Fyodorovitch. You mayas well know. For I mean to go on in my sins to the end, let me tell you.For sin is sweet; all abuse it, but all men live in it, only others do iton the sly, and I openly. And so all the other sinners fall upon me forbeing so simple. And your paradise, Alexey Fyodorovitch, is not to mytaste, let me tell you that; and it’s not the proper place for agentleman, your paradise, even if it exists. I believe that I fall asleepand don’t wake up again, and that’s all. You can pray for my soul if youlike. And if you don’t want to, don’t, damn you! That’s my philosophy.Ivan talked well here yesterday, though we were all drunk. Ivan is aconceited coxcomb, but he has no particular learning ... nor educationeither. He sits silent and smiles at one without speaking—that’s whatpulls him through.”
Alyosha listened to him in silence.
“Why won’t he talk to me? If he does speak, he gives himself airs. YourIvan is a scoundrel! And I’ll marry Grushenka in a minute if I want to.For if you’ve money, Alexey Fyodorovitch, you have only to want a thingand you can have it. That’s what Ivan is afraid of, he is on the watch toprevent me getting married and that’s why he is egging on Mitya to marryGrushenka himself. He hopes to keep me from Grushenka by that (as though Ishould leave him my money if I don’t marry her!). Besides if Mitya marriesGrushenka, Ivan will carry off his rich betrothed, that’s what he’sreckoning on! He is a scoundrel, your Ivan!”
“How cross you are! It’s because of yesterday; you had better lie down,”said Alyosha.
“There! you say that,” the old man observed suddenly, as though it hadstruck him for the first time, “and I am not angry with you. But if Ivansaid it, I should be angry with him. It is only with you I have goodmoments, else you know I am an ill‐natured man.”
“You are not ill‐natured, but distorted,” said Alyosha with a smile.
“Listen. I meant this morning to get that ruffian Mitya locked up and Idon’t know now what I shall decide about it. Of course in thesefashionable days fathers and mothers are looked upon as a prejudice, buteven now the law does not allow you to drag your old father about by thehair, to kick him in the face in his own house, and brag of murdering himoutright—all in the presence of witnesses. If I liked, I could crush himand could have him locked up at once for what he did yesterday.”
“Then you don’t mean to take proceedings?”
“Ivan has dissuaded me. I shouldn’t care about Ivan, but there’s anotherthing.”
And bending down to Alyosha, he went on in a confidential half‐whisper.
“If I send the ruffian to prison, she’ll hear of it and run to see him atonce. But if she hears that he has beaten me, a weak old man, within aninch of my life, she may give him up and come to me.... For that’s herway, everything by contraries. I know her through and through! Won’t youhave a drop of brandy? Take some cold coffee and I’ll pour a quarter of aglass of brandy into it, it’s delicious, my boy.”
“No, thank you. I’ll take that roll with me if I may,” said Alyosha, andtaking a halfpenny French roll he put it in the pocket of his cassock.“And you’d better not have brandy, either,” he suggested apprehensively,looking into the old man’s face.
“You are quite right, it irritates my nerves instead of soothing them.Only one little glass. I’ll get it out of the cupboard.”
He unlocked the cupboard, poured out a glass, drank it, then locked thecupboard and put the key back in his pocket.
“That’s enough. One glass won’t kill me.”
“You see you are in a better humor now,” said Alyosha, smiling.
“Um! I love you even without the brandy, but with scoundrels I am ascoundrel. Ivan is not going to Tchermashnya—why is that? He wants to spyhow much I give Grushenka if she comes. They are all scoundrels! But Idon’t recognize Ivan, I don’t know him at all. Where does he come from? Heis not one of us in soul. As though I’d leave him anything! I shan’t leavea will at all, you may as well know. And I’ll crush Mitya like a beetle. Isquash black‐beetles at night with my slipper; they squelch when you treadon them. And your Mitya will squelch too. _Your_ Mitya, for you love him.Yes, you love him and I am not afraid of your loving him. But if Ivanloved him I should be afraid for myself at his loving him. But Ivan lovesnobody. Ivan is not one of us. People like Ivan are not our sort, my boy.They are like a cloud of dust. When the wind blows, the dust will begone.... I had a silly idea in my head when I told you to come to‐day; Iwanted to find out from you about Mitya. If I were to hand him over athousand or maybe two now, would the beggarly wretch agree to take himselfoff altogether for five years or, better still, thirty‐five, and withoutGrushenka, and give her up once for all, eh?”
“I—I’ll ask him,” muttered Alyosha. “If you would give him three thousand,perhaps he—”
“That’s nonsense! You needn’t ask him now, no need! I’ve changed my mind.It was a nonsensical idea of mine. I won’t give him anything, not a penny,I want my money myself,” cried the old man, waving his hand. “I’ll crushhim like a beetle without it. Don’t say anything to him or else he willbegin hoping. There’s nothing for you to do here, you needn’t stay. Isthat betrothed of his, Katerina Ivanovna, whom he has kept so carefullyhidden from me all this time, going to marry him or not? You went to seeher yesterday, I believe?”
“Nothing will induce her to abandon him.”
“There you see how dearly these fine young ladies love a rake and ascoundrel. They are poor creatures I tell you, those pale young ladies,very different from—Ah, if I had his youth and the looks I had then (for Iwas better‐looking than he at eight and twenty) I’d have been a conqueringhero just as he is. He is a low cad! But he shan’t have Grushenka, anyway,he shan’t! I’ll crush him!”
His anger had returned with the last words.
“You can go. There’s nothing for you to do here to‐day,” he snappedharshly.
Alyosha went up to say good‐by to him, and kissed him on the shoulder.
“What’s that for?” The old man was a little surprised. “We shall see eachother again, or do you think we shan’t?”
“Not at all, I didn’t mean anything.”
“Nor did I, I did not mean anything,” said the old man, looking at him.“Listen, listen,” he shouted after him, “make haste and come again andI’ll have a fish soup for you, a fine one, not like to‐day. Be sure tocome! Come to‐morrow, do you hear, to‐morrow!”
And as soon as Alyosha had gone out of the door, he went to the cupboardagain and poured out another half‐glass.
“I won’t have more!” he muttered, clearing his throat, and again he lockedthe cupboard and put the key in his pocket. Then he went into his bedroom,lay down on the bed, exhausted, and in one minute he was asleep.


Chapter III. A Meeting With The Schoolboys

“Thank goodness he did not ask me about Grushenka,” thought Alyosha, as heleft his father’s house and turned towards Madame Hohlakov’s, “or I mighthave to tell him of my meeting with Grushenka yesterday.”
Alyosha felt painfully that since yesterday both combatants had renewedtheir energies, and that their hearts had grown hard again. “Father isspiteful and angry, he’s made some plan and will stick to it. And what ofDmitri? He too will be harder than yesterday, he too must be spiteful andangry, and he too, no doubt, has made some plan. Oh, I must succeed infinding him to‐day, whatever happens.”
But Alyosha had not long to meditate. An incident occurred on the road,which, though apparently of little consequence, made a great impression onhim. Just after he had crossed the square and turned the corner coming outinto Mihailovsky Street, which is divided by a small ditch from the HighStreet (our whole town is intersected by ditches), he saw a group ofschoolboys between the ages of nine and twelve, at the bridge. They weregoing home from school, some with their bags on their shoulders, otherswith leather satchels slung across them, some in short jackets, others inlittle overcoats. Some even had those high boots with creases round theankles, such as little boys spoilt by rich fathers love to wear. The wholegroup was talking eagerly about something, apparently holding a council.Alyosha had never from his Moscow days been able to pass children withouttaking notice of them, and although he was particularly fond of childrenof three or thereabout, he liked schoolboys of ten and eleven too. And so,anxious as he was to‐day, he wanted at once to turn aside to talk to them.He looked into their excited rosy faces, and noticed at once that all theboys had stones in their hands. Behind the ditch some thirty paces away,there was another schoolboy standing by a fence. He too had a satchel athis side. He was about ten years old, pale, delicate‐looking and withsparkling black eyes. He kept an attentive and anxious watch on the othersix, obviously his schoolfellows with whom he had just come out of school,but with whom he had evidently had a feud.
Alyosha went up and, addressing a fair, curly‐headed, rosy boy in a blackjacket, observed:
“When I used to wear a satchel like yours, I always used to carry it on myleft side, so as to have my right hand free, but you’ve got yours on yourright side. So it will be awkward for you to get at it.”
Alyosha had no art or premeditation in beginning with this practicalremark. But it is the only way for a grown‐up person to get at once intoconfidential relations with a child, or still more with a group ofchildren. One must begin in a serious, businesslike way so as to be on aperfectly equal footing. Alyosha understood it by instinct.
“But he is left‐handed,” another, a fine healthy‐looking boy of eleven,answered promptly. All the others stared at Alyosha.
“He even throws stones with his left hand,” observed a third.
At that instant a stone flew into the group, but only just grazed theleft‐handed boy, though it was well and vigorously thrown by the boystanding the other side of the ditch.
“Give it him, hit him back, Smurov,” they all shouted. But Smurov, theleft‐handed boy, needed no telling, and at once revenged himself; he threwa stone, but it missed the boy and hit the ground. The boy the other sideof the ditch, the pocket of whose coat was visibly bulging with stones,flung another stone at the group; this time it flew straight at Alyoshaand hit him painfully on the shoulder.
“He aimed it at you, he meant it for you. You are Karamazov, Karamazov!”the boys shouted, laughing. “Come, all throw at him at once!” and sixstones flew at the boy. One struck the boy on the head and he fell down,but at once leapt up and began ferociously returning their fire. Bothsides threw stones incessantly. Many of the group had their pockets fulltoo.
“What are you about! Aren’t you ashamed? Six against one! Why, you’ll killhim,” cried Alyosha.
He ran forward and met the flying stones to screen the solitary boy. Threeor four ceased throwing for a minute.
“He began first!” cried a boy in a red shirt in an angry childish voice.“He is a beast, he stabbed Krassotkin in class the other day with apenknife. It bled. Krassotkin wouldn’t tell tales, but he must bethrashed.”
“But what for? I suppose you tease him.”
“There, he sent a stone in your back again, he knows you,” cried thechildren. “It’s you he is throwing at now, not us. Come, all of you, athim again, don’t miss, Smurov!” and again a fire of stones, and a veryvicious one, began. The boy the other side of the ditch was hit in thechest; he screamed, began to cry and ran away uphill towards MihailovskyStreet. They all shouted: “Aha, he is funking, he is running away. Wisp oftow!”
“You don’t know what a beast he is, Karamazov, killing is too good forhim,” said the boy in the jacket, with flashing eyes. He seemed to be theeldest.
“What’s wrong with him?” asked Alyosha, “is he a tell‐tale or what?”
The boys looked at one another as though derisively.
“Are you going that way, to Mihailovsky?” the same boy went on. “Catch himup.... You see he’s stopped again, he is waiting and looking at you.”
“He is looking at you,” the other boys chimed in.
“You ask him, does he like a disheveled wisp of tow. Do you hear, ask himthat!”
There was a general burst of laughter. Alyosha looked at them, and they athim.
“Don’t go near him, he’ll hurt you,” cried Smurov in a warning voice.
“I shan’t ask him about the wisp of tow, for I expect you tease him withthat question somehow. But I’ll find out from him why you hate him so.”
“Find out then, find out,” cried the boys, laughing.
Alyosha crossed the bridge and walked uphill by the fence, straighttowards the boy.
“You’d better look out,” the boys called after him; “he won’t be afraid ofyou. He will stab you in a minute, on the sly, as he did Krassotkin.”
The boy waited for him without budging. Coming up to him, Alyosha sawfacing him a child of about nine years old. He was an undersized weaklyboy with a thin pale face, with large dark eyes that gazed at himvindictively. He was dressed in a rather shabby old overcoat, which he hadmonstrously outgrown. His bare arms stuck out beyond his sleeves. Therewas a large patch on the right knee of his trousers, and in his right bootjust at the toe there was a big hole in the leather, carefully blackenedwith ink. Both the pockets of his great‐coat were weighed down withstones. Alyosha stopped two steps in front of him, looking inquiringly athim. The boy, seeing at once from Alyosha’s eyes that he wouldn’t beathim, became less defiant, and addressed him first.
“I am alone, and there are six of them. I’ll beat them all, alone!” hesaid suddenly, with flashing eyes.
“I think one of the stones must have hurt you badly,” observed Alyosha.
“But I hit Smurov on the head!” cried the boy.
“They told me that you know me, and that you threw a stone at me onpurpose,” said Alyosha.
The boy looked darkly at him.
“I don’t know you. Do you know me?” Alyosha continued.
“Let me alone!” the boy cried irritably; but he did not move, as though hewere expecting something, and again there was a vindictive light in hiseyes.
“Very well, I am going,” said Alyosha; “only I don’t know you and I don’ttease you. They told me how they tease you, but I don’t want to tease you.Good‐by!”
“Monk in silk trousers!” cried the boy, following Alyosha with the samevindictive and defiant expression, and he threw himself into an attitudeof defense, feeling sure that now Alyosha would fall upon him; but Alyoshaturned, looked at him, and walked away. He had not gone three steps beforethe biggest stone the boy had in his pocket hit him a painful blow in theback.
“So you’ll hit a man from behind! They tell the truth, then, when they saythat you attack on the sly,” said Alyosha, turning round again. This timethe boy threw a stone savagely right into Alyosha’s face; but Alyosha justhad time to guard himself, and the stone struck him on the elbow.
“Aren’t you ashamed? What have I done to you?” he cried.
The boy waited in silent defiance, certain that now Alyosha would attackhim. Seeing that even now he would not, his rage was like a little wildbeast’s; he flew at Alyosha himself, and before Alyosha had time to move,the spiteful child had seized his left hand with both of his and bit hismiddle finger. He fixed his teeth in it and it was ten seconds before helet go. Alyosha cried out with pain and pulled his finger away with allhis might. The child let go at last and retreated to his former distance.Alyosha’s finger had been badly bitten to the bone, close to the nail; itbegan to bleed. Alyosha took out his handkerchief and bound it tightlyround his injured hand. He was a full minute bandaging it. The boy stoodwaiting all the time. At last Alyosha raised his gentle eyes and looked athim.
“Very well,” he said, “you see how badly you’ve bitten me. That’s enough,isn’t it? Now tell me, what have I done to you?”
The boy stared in amazement.
“Though I don’t know you and it’s the first time I’ve seen you,” Alyoshawent on with the same serenity, “yet I must have done something to you—youwouldn’t have hurt me like this for nothing. So what have I done? How haveI wronged you, tell me?”
Instead of answering, the boy broke into a loud tearful wail and ran away.Alyosha walked slowly after him towards Mihailovsky Street, and for a longtime he saw the child running in the distance as fast as ever, not turninghis head, and no doubt still keeping up his tearful wail. He made up hismind to find him out as soon as he had time, and to solve this mystery.Just now he had not the time.


Chapter IV. At The Hohlakovs’

Alyosha soon reached Madame Hohlakov’s house, a handsome stone house oftwo stories, one of the finest in our town. Though Madame Hohlakov spentmost of her time in another province where she had an estate, or inMoscow, where she had a house of her own, yet she had a house in our towntoo, inherited from her forefathers. The estate in our district was thelargest of her three estates, yet she had been very little in our provincebefore this time. She ran out to Alyosha in the hall.
“Did you get my letter about the new miracle?” She spoke rapidly andnervously.
“Yes.”
“Did you show it to every one? He restored the son to his mother!”
“He is dying to‐day,” said Alyosha.
“I have heard, I know, oh, how I long to talk to you, to you or some one,about all this. No, to you, to you! And how sorry I am I can’t see him!The whole town is in excitement, they are all suspense. But now—do youknow Katerina Ivanovna is here now?”
“Ah, that’s lucky,” cried Alyosha. “Then I shall see her here. She told meyesterday to be sure to come and see her to‐day.”
“I know, I know all. I’ve heard exactly what happened yesterday—and theatrocious behavior of that—creature. _C’est tragique_, and if I’d been inher place I don’t know what I should have done. And your brother DmitriFyodorovitch, what do you think of him?—my goodness! Alexey Fyodorovitch,I am forgetting, only fancy; your brother is in there with her, not thatdreadful brother who was so shocking yesterday, but the other, IvanFyodorovitch, he is sitting with her talking; they are having a seriousconversation. If you could only imagine what’s passing between themnow—it’s awful, I tell you it’s lacerating, it’s like some incredible taleof horror. They are ruining their lives for no reason any one can see.They both recognize it and revel in it. I’ve been watching for you! I’vebeen thirsting for you! It’s too much for me, that’s the worst of it. I’lltell you all about it presently, but now I must speak of something else,the most important thing—I had quite forgotten what’s most important. Tellme, why has Lise been in hysterics? As soon as she heard you were here,she began to be hysterical!”
“_Maman_, it’s you who are hysterical now, not I,” Lise’s voice caroledthrough a tiny crack of the door at the side. Her voice sounded as thoughshe wanted to laugh, but was doing her utmost to control it. Alyosha atonce noticed the crack, and no doubt Lise was peeping through it, but thathe could not see.
“And no wonder, Lise, no wonder ... your caprices will make me hystericaltoo. But she is so ill, Alexey Fyodorovitch, she has been so ill allnight, feverish and moaning! I could hardly wait for the morning and forHerzenstube to come. He says that he can make nothing of it, that we mustwait. Herzenstube always comes and says that he can make nothing of it. Assoon as you approached the house, she screamed, fell into hysterics, andinsisted on being wheeled back into this room here.”
“Mamma, I didn’t know he had come. It wasn’t on his account I wanted to bewheeled into this room.”
“That’s not true, Lise, Yulia ran to tell you that Alexey Fyodorovitch wascoming. She was on the look‐out for you.”
“My darling mamma, it’s not at all clever of you. But if you want to makeup for it and say something very clever, dear mamma, you’d better tell ourhonored visitor, Alexey Fyodorovitch, that he has shown his want of wit byventuring to us after what happened yesterday and although every one islaughing at him.”
“Lise, you go too far. I declare I shall have to be severe. Who laughs athim? I am so glad he has come, I need him, I can’t do without him. Oh,Alexey Fyodorovitch, I am exceedingly unhappy!”
“But what’s the matter with you, mamma, darling?”
“Ah, your caprices, Lise, your fidgetiness, your illness, that awful nightof fever, that awful everlasting Herzenstube, everlasting, everlasting,that’s the worst of it! Everything, in fact, everything.... Even thatmiracle, too! Oh, how it has upset me, how it has shattered me, thatmiracle, dear Alexey Fyodorovitch! And that tragedy in the drawing‐room,it’s more than I can bear, I warn you. I can’t bear it. A comedy, perhaps,not a tragedy. Tell me, will Father Zossima live till to‐morrow, will he?Oh, my God! What is happening to me? Every minute I close my eyes and seethat it’s all nonsense, all nonsense.”
“I should be very grateful,” Alyosha interrupted suddenly, “if you couldgive me a clean rag to bind up my finger with. I have hurt it, and it’svery painful.”
Alyosha unbound his bitten finger. The handkerchief was soaked with blood.Madame Hohlakov screamed and shut her eyes.
“Good heavens, what a wound, how awful!”
But as soon as Lise saw Alyosha’s finger through the crack, she flung thedoor wide open.
“Come, come here,” she cried, imperiously. “No nonsense now! Good heavens,why did you stand there saying nothing about it all this time? He mighthave bled to death, mamma! How did you do it? Water, water! You must washit first of all, simply hold it in cold water to stop the pain, and keepit there, keep it there.... Make haste, mamma, some water in a slop‐basin.But do make haste,” she finished nervously. She was quite frightened atthe sight of Alyosha’s wound.
“Shouldn’t we send for Herzenstube?” cried Madame Hohlakov.
“Mamma, you’ll be the death of me. Your Herzenstube will come and say thathe can make nothing of it! Water, water! Mamma, for goodness’ sake goyourself and hurry Yulia, she is such a slowcoach and never can comequickly! Make haste, mamma, or I shall die.”
“Why, it’s nothing much,” cried Alyosha, frightened at this alarm.
Yulia ran in with water and Alyosha put his finger in it.
“Some lint, mamma, for mercy’s sake, bring some lint and that muddycaustic lotion for wounds, what’s it called? We’ve got some. You knowwhere the bottle is, mamma; it’s in your bedroom in the right‐handcupboard, there’s a big bottle of it there with the lint.”
“I’ll bring everything in a minute, Lise, only don’t scream and don’tfuss. You see how bravely Alexey Fyodorovitch bears it. Where did you getsuch a dreadful wound, Alexey Fyodorovitch?”
Madame Hohlakov hastened away. This was all Lise was waiting for.
“First of all, answer the question, where did you get hurt like this?” sheasked Alyosha, quickly. “And then I’ll talk to you about something quitedifferent. Well?”
Instinctively feeling that the time of her mother’s absence was preciousfor her, Alyosha hastened to tell her of his enigmatic meeting with theschoolboys in the fewest words possible. Lise clasped her hands at hisstory.
“How can you, and in that dress too, associate with schoolboys?” she criedangrily, as though she had a right to control him. “You are nothing but aboy yourself if you can do that, a perfect boy! But you must find out forme about that horrid boy and tell me all about it, for there’s somemystery in it. Now for the second thing, but first a question: does thepain prevent you talking about utterly unimportant things, but talkingsensibly?”
“Of course not, and I don’t feel much pain now.”
“That’s because your finger is in the water. It must be changed directly,for it will get warm in a minute. Yulia, bring some ice from the cellarand another basin of water. Now she is gone, I can speak; will you give methe letter I sent you yesterday, dear Alexey Fyodorovitch—be quick, formamma will be back in a minute and I don’t want—”
“I haven’t got the letter.”
“That’s not true, you have. I knew you would say that. You’ve got it inthat pocket. I’ve been regretting that joke all night. Give me back theletter at once, give it me.”
“I’ve left it at home.”
“But you can’t consider me as a child, a little girl, after that sillyjoke! I beg your pardon for that silliness, but you must bring me theletter, if you really haven’t got it—bring it to‐day, you must, you must.”
“To‐day I can’t possibly, for I am going back to the monastery and Ishan’t come and see you for the next two days—three or four perhaps—forFather Zossima—”
“Four days, what nonsense! Listen. Did you laugh at me very much?”
“I didn’t laugh at all.”
“Why not?”
“Because I believed all you said.”
“You are insulting me!”
“Not at all. As soon as I read it, I thought that all that would come topass, for as soon as Father Zossima dies, I am to leave the monastery.Then I shall go back and finish my studies, and when you reach the legalage we will be married. I shall love you. Though I haven’t had time tothink about it, I believe I couldn’t find a better wife than you, andFather Zossima tells me I must marry.”
“But I am a cripple, wheeled about in a chair,” laughed Lise, flushingcrimson.
“I’ll wheel you about myself, but I’m sure you’ll get well by then.”
“But you are mad,” said Lise, nervously, “to make all this nonsense out ofa joke! Here’s mamma, very _à propos_, perhaps. Mamma, how slow you alwaysare, how can you be so long! And here’s Yulia with the ice!”
“Oh, Lise, don’t scream, above all things don’t scream. That scream drivesme ... How can I help it when you put the lint in another place? I’ve beenhunting and hunting—I do believe you did it on purpose.”
“But I couldn’t tell that he would come with a bad finger, or else perhapsI might have done it on purpose. My darling mamma, you begin to say reallywitty things.”
“Never mind my being witty, but I must say you show nice feeling forAlexey Fyodorovitch’s sufferings! Oh, my dear Alexey Fyodorovitch, what’skilling me is no one thing in particular, not Herzenstube, but everythingtogether, that’s what is too much for me.”
“That’s enough, mamma, enough about Herzenstube,” Lise laughed gayly.“Make haste with the lint and the lotion, mamma. That’s simply Goulard’swater, Alexey Fyodorovitch, I remember the name now, but it’s a splendidlotion. Would you believe it, mamma, on the way here he had a fight withthe boys in the street, and it was a boy bit his finger, isn’t he a child,a child himself? Is he fit to be married after that? For only fancy, hewants to be married, mamma. Just think of him married, wouldn’t it befunny, wouldn’t it be awful?”
And Lise kept laughing her thin hysterical giggle, looking slyly atAlyosha.
“But why married, Lise? What makes you talk of such a thing? It’s quiteout of place—and perhaps the boy was rabid.”
“Why, mamma! As though there were rabid boys!”
“Why not, Lise, as though I had said something stupid! Your boy might havebeen bitten by a mad dog and he would become mad and bite any one nearhim. How well she has bandaged it, Alexey Fyodorovitch! I couldn’t havedone it. Do you still feel the pain?”
“It’s nothing much now.”
“You don’t feel afraid of water?” asked Lise.
“Come, that’s enough, Lise, perhaps I really was rather too quick talkingof the boy being rabid, and you pounced upon it at once Katerina Ivanovnahas only just heard that you are here, Alexey Fyodorovitch, she simplyrushed at me, she’s dying to see you, dying!”
“Ach, mamma, go to them yourself. He can’t go just now, he is in too muchpain.”
“Not at all, I can go quite well,” said Alyosha.
“What! You are going away? Is that what you say?”
“Well, when I’ve seen them, I’ll come back here and we can talk as much asyou like. But I should like to see Katerina Ivanovna at once, for I amvery anxious to be back at the monastery as soon as I can.”
“Mamma, take him away quickly. Alexey Fyodorovitch, don’t trouble to comeand see me afterwards, but go straight back to your monastery and a goodriddance. I want to sleep, I didn’t sleep all night.”
“Ah, Lise, you are only making fun, but how I wish you would sleep!” criedMadame Hohlakov.
“I don’t know what I’ve done.... I’ll stay another three minutes, five ifyou like,” muttered Alyosha.
“Even five! Do take him away quickly, mamma, he is a monster.”
“Lise, you are crazy. Let us go, Alexey Fyodorovitch, she is toocapricious to‐day. I am afraid to cross her. Oh, the trouble one has withnervous girls! Perhaps she really will be able to sleep after seeing you.How quickly you have made her sleepy, and how fortunate it is!”
“Ah, mamma, how sweetly you talk! I must kiss you for it, mamma.”
“And I kiss you too, Lise. Listen, Alexey Fyodorovitch,” Madame Hohlakovbegan mysteriously and importantly, speaking in a rapid whisper. “I don’twant to suggest anything, I don’t want to lift the veil, you will see foryourself what’s going on. It’s appalling. It’s the most fantastic farce.She loves your brother, Ivan, and she is doing her utmost to persuadeherself she loves your brother, Dmitri. It’s appalling! I’ll go in withyou, and if they don’t turn me out, I’ll stay to the end.”


Chapter V. A Laceration In The Drawing‐Room

But in the drawing‐room the conversation was already over. KaterinaIvanovna was greatly excited, though she looked resolute. At the momentAlyosha and Madame Hohlakov entered, Ivan Fyodorovitch stood up to takeleave. His face was rather pale, and Alyosha looked at him anxiously. Forthis moment was to solve a doubt, a harassing enigma which had for sometime haunted Alyosha. During the preceding month it had been several timessuggested to him that his brother Ivan was in love with Katerina Ivanovna,and, what was more, that he meant “to carry her off” from Dmitri. Untilquite lately the idea seemed to Alyosha monstrous, though it worried himextremely. He loved both his brothers, and dreaded such rivalry betweenthem. Meantime, Dmitri had said outright on the previous day that he wasglad that Ivan was his rival, and that it was a great assistance to him,Dmitri. In what way did it assist him? To marry Grushenka? But thatAlyosha considered the worst thing possible. Besides all this, Alyosha hadtill the evening before implicitly believed that Katerina Ivanovna had asteadfast and passionate love for Dmitri; but he had only believed it tillthe evening before. He had fancied, too, that she was incapable of lovinga man like Ivan, and that she did love Dmitri, and loved him just as hewas, in spite of all the strangeness of such a passion.
But during yesterday’s scene with Grushenka another idea had struck him.The word “lacerating,” which Madame Hohlakov had just uttered, almost madehim start, because half waking up towards daybreak that night he had criedout “Laceration, laceration,” probably applying it to his dream. He hadbeen dreaming all night of the previous day’s scene at KaterinaIvanovna’s. Now Alyosha was impressed by Madame Hohlakov’s blunt andpersistent assertion that Katerina Ivanovna was in love with Ivan, andonly deceived herself through some sort of pose, from “self‐laceration,”and tortured herself by her pretended love for Dmitri from some fanciedduty of gratitude. “Yes,” he thought, “perhaps the whole truth lies inthose words.” But in that case what was Ivan’s position? Alyosha feltinstinctively that a character like Katerina Ivanovna’s must dominate, andshe could only dominate some one like Dmitri, and never a man like Ivan.For Dmitri might at last submit to her domination “to his own happiness”(which was what Alyosha would have desired), but Ivan—no, Ivan could notsubmit to her, and such submission would not give him happiness. Alyoshacould not help believing that of Ivan. And now all these doubts andreflections flitted through his mind as he entered the drawing‐room.Another idea, too, forced itself upon him: “What if she loved neither ofthem—neither Ivan nor Dmitri?”
It must be noted that Alyosha felt as it were ashamed of his own thoughtsand blamed himself when they kept recurring to him during the last month.“What do I know about love and women and how can I decide such questions?”he thought reproachfully, after such doubts and surmises. And yet it wasimpossible not to think about it. He felt instinctively that this rivalrywas of immense importance in his brothers’ lives and that a great dealdepended upon it.
“One reptile will devour the other,” Ivan had pronounced the day before,speaking in anger of his father and Dmitri. So Ivan looked upon Dmitri asa reptile, and perhaps had long done so. Was it perhaps since he had knownKaterina Ivanovna? That phrase had, of course, escaped Ivan unawaresyesterday, but that only made it more important. If he felt like that,what chance was there of peace? Were there not, on the contrary, newgrounds for hatred and hostility in their family? And with which of themwas Alyosha to sympathize? And what was he to wish for each of them? Heloved them both, but what could he desire for each in the midst of theseconflicting interests? He might go quite astray in this maze, andAlyosha’s heart could not endure uncertainty, because his love was alwaysof an active character. He was incapable of passive love. If he loved anyone, he set to work at once to help him. And to do so he must know what hewas aiming at; he must know for certain what was best for each, and havingascertained this it was natural for him to help them both. But instead ofa definite aim, he found nothing but uncertainty and perplexity on allsides. “It was lacerating,” as was said just now. But what could heunderstand even in this “laceration”? He did not understand the first wordin this perplexing maze.
Seeing Alyosha, Katerina Ivanovna said quickly and joyfully to Ivan, whohad already got up to go, “A minute! Stay another minute! I want to hearthe opinion of this person here whom I trust absolutely. Don’t go away,”she added, addressing Madame Hohlakov. She made Alyosha sit down besideher, and Madame Hohlakov sat opposite, by Ivan.
“You are all my friends here, all I have in the world, my dear friends,”she began warmly, in a voice which quivered with genuine tears ofsuffering, and Alyosha’s heart warmed to her at once. “You, AlexeyFyodorovitch, were witness yesterday of that abominable scene, and sawwhat I did. You did not see it, Ivan Fyodorovitch, he did. What he thoughtof me yesterday I don’t know. I only know one thing, that if it wererepeated to‐day, this minute, I should express the same feelings again asyesterday—the same feelings, the same words, the same actions. Youremember my actions, Alexey Fyodorovitch; you checked me in one of them”... (as she said that, she flushed and her eyes shone). “I must tell youthat I can’t get over it. Listen, Alexey Fyodorovitch. I don’t even knowwhether I still love _him_. I feel _pity_ for him, and that is a poor signof love. If I loved him, if I still loved him, perhaps I shouldn’t besorry for him now, but should hate him.”
Her voice quivered, and tears glittered on her eyelashes. Alyoshashuddered inwardly. “That girl is truthful and sincere,” he thought, “andshe does not love Dmitri any more.”
“That’s true, that’s true,” cried Madame Hohlakov.
“Wait, dear. I haven’t told you the chief, the final decision I came toduring the night. I feel that perhaps my decision is a terrible one—forme, but I foresee that nothing will induce me to change it—nothing. Itwill be so all my life. My dear, kind, ever‐faithful and generous adviser,the one friend I have in the world, Ivan Fyodorovitch, with his deepinsight into the heart, approves and commends my decision. He knows it.”
“Yes, I approve of it,” Ivan assented, in a subdued but firm voice.
“But I should like Alyosha, too (Ah! Alexey Fyodorovitch, forgive mycalling you simply Alyosha), I should like Alexey Fyodorovitch, too, totell me before my two friends whether I am right. I feel instinctivelythat you, Alyosha, my dear brother (for you are a dear brother to me),”she said again ecstatically, taking his cold hand in her hot one, “Iforesee that your decision, your approval, will bring me peace, in spiteof all my sufferings, for, after your words, I shall be calm and submit—Ifeel that.”
“I don’t know what you are asking me,” said Alyosha, flushing. “I onlyknow that I love you and at this moment wish for your happiness more thanmy own!... But I know nothing about such affairs,” something impelled himto add hurriedly.
“In such affairs, Alexey Fyodorovitch, in such affairs, the chief thing ishonor and duty and something higher—I don’t know what—but higher perhapseven than duty. I am conscious of this irresistible feeling in my heart,and it compels me irresistibly. But it may all be put in two words. I’vealready decided, even if he marries that—creature,” she began solemnly,“whom I never, never can forgive, _even then I will not abandon him_.Henceforward I will never, never abandon him!” she cried, breaking into asort of pale, hysterical ecstasy. “Not that I would run after himcontinually, get in his way and worry him. Oh, no! I will go away toanother town—where you like—but I will watch over him all my life—I willwatch over him all my life unceasingly. When he becomes unhappy with thatwoman, and that is bound to happen quite soon, let him come to me and hewill find a friend, a sister.... Only a sister, of course, and so forever; but he will learn at least that that sister is really his sister,who loves him and has sacrificed all her life to him. I will gain mypoint. I will insist on his knowing me and confiding entirely in me,without reserve,” she cried, in a sort of frenzy. “I will be a god to whomhe can pray—and that, at least, he owes me for his treachery and for whatI suffered yesterday through him. And let him see that all my life I willbe true to him and the promise I gave him, in spite of his being untrueand betraying me. I will—I will become nothing but a means for hishappiness, or—how shall I say?—an instrument, a machine for his happiness,and that for my whole life, my whole life, and that he may see that allhis life! That’s my decision. Ivan Fyodorovitch fully approves me.”
She was breathless. She had perhaps intended to express her idea with moredignity, art and naturalness, but her speech was too hurried and crude. Itwas full of youthful impulsiveness, it betrayed that she was stillsmarting from yesterday’s insult, and that her pride craved satisfaction.She felt this herself. Her face suddenly darkened, an unpleasant look cameinto her eyes. Alyosha at once saw it and felt a pang of sympathy. Hisbrother Ivan made it worse by adding:
“I’ve only expressed my own view,” he said. “From any one else, this wouldhave been affected and overstrained, but from you—no. Any other womanwould have been wrong, but you are right. I don’t know how to explain it,but I see that you are absolutely genuine and, therefore, you are right.”
“But that’s only for the moment. And what does this moment stand for?Nothing but yesterday’s insult.” Madame Hohlakov obviously had notintended to interfere, but she could not refrain from this very justcomment.
“Quite so, quite so,” cried Ivan, with peculiar eagerness, obviouslyannoyed at being interrupted, “in any one else this moment would be onlydue to yesterday’s impression and would be only a moment. But withKaterina Ivanovna’s character, that moment will last all her life. Whatfor any one else would be only a promise is for her an everlastingburdensome, grim perhaps, but unflagging duty. And she will be sustainedby the feeling of this duty being fulfilled. Your life, Katerina Ivanovna,will henceforth be spent in painful brooding over your own feelings, yourown heroism, and your own suffering; but in the end that suffering will besoftened and will pass into sweet contemplation of the fulfillment of abold and proud design. Yes, proud it certainly is, and desperate in anycase, but a triumph for you. And the consciousness of it will at last be asource of complete satisfaction and will make you resigned to everythingelse.”
This was unmistakably said with some malice and obviously with intention;even perhaps with no desire to conceal that he spoke ironically and withintention.
“Oh, dear, how mistaken it all is!” Madame Hohlakov cried again.
“Alexey Fyodorovitch, you speak. I want dreadfully to know what you willsay!” cried Katerina Ivanovna, and burst into tears. Alyosha got up fromthe sofa.
“It’s nothing, nothing!” she went on through her tears. “I’m upset, Ididn’t sleep last night. But by the side of two such friends as you andyour brother I still feel strong—for I know—you two will never desert me.”
“Unluckily I am obliged to return to Moscow—perhaps to‐morrow—and to leaveyou for a long time—And, unluckily, it’s unavoidable,” Ivan said suddenly.
“To‐morrow—to Moscow!” her face was suddenly contorted; “but—but, dear me,how fortunate!” she cried in a voice suddenly changed. In one instantthere was no trace left of her tears. She underwent an instantaneoustransformation, which amazed Alyosha. Instead of a poor, insulted girl,weeping in a sort of “laceration,” he saw a woman completely self‐possessed and even exceedingly pleased, as though something agreeable hadjust happened.
“Oh, not fortunate that I am losing you, of course not,” she correctedherself suddenly, with a charming society smile. “Such a friend as you arecould not suppose that. I am only too unhappy at losing you.” She rushedimpulsively at Ivan, and seizing both his hands, pressed them warmly. “Butwhat is fortunate is that you will be able in Moscow to see auntie andAgafya and to tell them all the horror of my present position. You canspeak with complete openness to Agafya, but spare dear auntie. You willknow how to do that. You can’t think how wretched I was yesterday and thismorning, wondering how I could write them that dreadful letter—for one cannever tell such things in a letter.... Now it will be easy for me towrite, for you will see them and explain everything. Oh, how glad I am!But I am only glad of that, believe me. Of course, no one can take yourplace.... I will run at once to write the letter,” she finished suddenly,and took a step as though to go out of the room.
“And what about Alyosha and his opinion, which you were so desperatelyanxious to hear?” cried Madame Hohlakov. There was a sarcastic, angry notein her voice.
“I had not forgotten that,” cried Katerina Ivanovna, coming to a suddenstandstill, “and why are you so antagonistic at such a moment?” she added,with warm and bitter reproachfulness. “What I said, I repeat. I must havehis opinion. More than that, I must have his decision! As he says, so itshall be. You see how anxious I am for your words, Alexey Fyodorovitch....But what’s the matter?”
“I couldn’t have believed it. I can’t understand it!” Alyosha criedsuddenly in distress.
“What? What?”
“He is going to Moscow, and you cry out that you are glad. You said thaton purpose! And you begin explaining that you are not glad of that butsorry to be—losing a friend. But that was acting, too—you were playing apart—as in a theater!”
“In a theater? What? What do you mean?” exclaimed Katerina Ivanovna,profoundly astonished, flushing crimson, and frowning.
“Though you assure him you are sorry to lose a friend in him, you persistin telling him to his face that it’s fortunate he is going,” said Alyoshabreathlessly. He was standing at the table and did not sit down.
“What are you talking about? I don’t understand.”
“I don’t understand myself.... I seemed to see in a flash ... I know I amnot saying it properly, but I’ll say it all the same,” Alyosha went on inthe same shaking and broken voice. “What I see is that perhaps you don’tlove Dmitri at all ... and never have, from the beginning.... And Dmitri,too, has never loved you ... and only esteems you.... I really don’t knowhow I dare to say all this, but somebody must tell the truth ... fornobody here will tell the truth.”
“What truth?” cried Katerina Ivanovna, and there was an hysterical ring inher voice.
“I’ll tell you,” Alyosha went on with desperate haste, as though he werejumping from the top of a house. “Call Dmitri; I will fetch him—and lethim come here and take your hand and take Ivan’s and join your hands. Foryou’re torturing Ivan, simply because you love him—and torturing him,because you love Dmitri through ‘self‐laceration’—with an unreallove—because you’ve persuaded yourself.”
Alyosha broke off and was silent.
“You ... you ... you are a little religious idiot—that’s what you are!”Katerina Ivanovna snapped. Her face was white and her lips were movingwith anger.
Ivan suddenly laughed and got up. His hat was in his hand.
“You are mistaken, my good Alyosha,” he said, with an expression Alyoshahad never seen in his face before—an expression of youthful sincerity andstrong, irresistibly frank feeling. “Katerina Ivanovna has never cared forme! She has known all the time that I cared for her—though I never said aword of my love to her—she knew, but she didn’t care for me. I have neverbeen her friend either, not for one moment; she is too proud to need myfriendship. She kept me at her side as a means of revenge. She revengedwith me and on me all the insults which she has been continually receivingfrom Dmitri ever since their first meeting. For even that first meetinghas rankled in her heart as an insult—that’s what her heart is like! Shehas talked to me of nothing but her love for him. I am going now; but,believe me, Katerina Ivanovna, you really love him. And the more heinsults you, the more you love him—that’s your ‘laceration.’ You love himjust as he is; you love him for insulting you. If he reformed, you’d givehim up at once and cease to love him. But you need him so as tocontemplate continually your heroic fidelity and to reproach him forinfidelity. And it all comes from your pride. Oh, there’s a great deal ofhumiliation and self‐abasement about it, but it all comes from pride.... Iam too young and I’ve loved you too much. I know that I ought not to saythis, that it would be more dignified on my part simply to leave you, andit would be less offensive for you. But I am going far away, and shallnever come back.... It is for ever. I don’t want to sit beside a‘laceration.’... But I don’t know how to speak now. I’ve saideverything.... Good‐by, Katerina Ivanovna; you can’t be angry with me, forI am a hundred times more severely punished than you, if only by the factthat I shall never see you again. Good‐by! I don’t want your hand. Youhave tortured me too deliberately for me to be able to forgive you at thismoment. I shall forgive you later, but now I don’t want your hand. ‘DenDank, Dame, begehr ich nicht,’ ” he added, with a forced smile, showing,however, that he could read Schiller, and read him till he knew him byheart—which Alyosha would never have believed. He went out of the roomwithout saying good‐by even to his hostess, Madame Hohlakov. Alyoshaclasped his hands.
“Ivan!” he cried desperately after him. “Come back, Ivan! No, nothing willinduce him to come back now!” he cried again, regretfully realizing it;“but it’s my fault, my fault. I began it! Ivan spoke angrily, wrongly.Unjustly and angrily. He must come back here, come back,” Alyosha keptexclaiming frantically.
Katerina Ivanovna went suddenly into the next room.
“You have done no harm. You behaved beautifully, like an angel,” MadameHohlakov whispered rapidly and ecstatically to Alyosha. “I will do myutmost to prevent Ivan Fyodorovitch from going.”
Her face beamed with delight, to the great distress of Alyosha, butKaterina Ivanovna suddenly returned. She had two hundred‐rouble notes inher hand.
“I have a great favor to ask of you, Alexey Fyodorovitch,” she began,addressing Alyosha with an apparently calm and even voice, as thoughnothing had happened. “A week—yes, I think it was a week ago—DmitriFyodorovitch was guilty of a hasty and unjust action—a very ugly action.There is a low tavern here, and in it he met that discharged officer, thatcaptain, whom your father used to employ in some business. DmitriFyodorovitch somehow lost his temper with this captain, seized him by thebeard and dragged him out into the street and for some distance along it,in that insulting fashion. And I am told that his son, a boy, quite achild, who is at the school here, saw it and ran beside them crying andbegging for his father, appealing to every one to defend him, while everyone laughed. You must forgive me, Alexey Fyodorovitch, I cannot thinkwithout indignation of that disgraceful action of _his_ ... one of thoseactions of which only Dmitri Fyodorovitch would be capable in his anger... and in his passions! I can’t describe it even.... I can’t find mywords. I’ve made inquiries about his victim, and find he is quite a poorman. His name is Snegiryov. He did something wrong in the army and wasdischarged. I can’t tell you what. And now he has sunk into terribledestitution, with his family—an unhappy family of sick children, and, Ibelieve, an insane wife. He has been living here a long time; he used towork as a copying clerk, but now he is getting nothing. I thought if you... that is I thought ... I don’t know. I am so confused. You see, Iwanted to ask you, my dear Alexey Fyodorovitch, to go to him, to find someexcuse to go to them—I mean to that captain—oh, goodness, how badly Iexplain it!—and delicately, carefully, as only you know how to” (Alyoshablushed), “manage to give him this assistance, these two hundred roubles.He will be sure to take it.... I mean, persuade him to take it.... Or,rather, what do I mean? You see it’s not by way of compensation to preventhim from taking proceedings (for I believe he meant to), but simply atoken of sympathy, of a desire to assist him from me, DmitriFyodorovitch’s betrothed, not from himself.... But you know.... I would gomyself, but you’ll know how to do it ever so much better. He lives in LakeStreet, in the house of a woman called Kalmikov.... For God’s sake, AlexeyFyodorovitch, do it for me, and now ... now I am rather ... tired. Good‐by!”
She turned and disappeared behind the portière so quickly that Alyosha hadnot time to utter a word, though he wanted to speak. He longed to beg herpardon, to blame himself, to say something, for his heart was full and hecould not bear to go out of the room without it. But Madame Hohlakov tookhim by the hand and drew him along with her. In the hall she stopped himagain as before.
“She is proud, she is struggling with herself; but kind, charming,generous,” she exclaimed, in a half‐whisper. “Oh, how I love her,especially sometimes, and how glad I am again of everything! Dear AlexeyFyodorovitch, you didn’t know, but I must tell you, that we all, all—bothher aunts, I and all of us, Lise, even—have been hoping and praying fornothing for the last month but that she may give up your favorite Dmitri,who takes no notice of her and does not care for her, and may marry IvanFyodorovitch—such an excellent and cultivated young man, who loves hermore than anything in the world. We are in a regular plot to bring itabout, and I am even staying on here perhaps on that account.”
“But she has been crying—she has been wounded again,” cried Alyosha.
“Never trust a woman’s tears, Alexey Fyodorovitch. I am never for thewomen in such cases. I am always on the side of the men.”
“Mamma, you are spoiling him,” Lise’s little voice cried from behind thedoor.
“No, it was all my fault. I am horribly to blame,” Alyosha repeatedunconsoled, hiding his face in his hands in an agony of remorse for hisindiscretion.
“Quite the contrary; you behaved like an angel, like an angel. I am readyto say so a thousand times over.”
“Mamma, how has he behaved like an angel?” Lise’s voice was heard again.
“I somehow fancied all at once,” Alyosha went on as though he had notheard Lise, “that she loved Ivan, and so I said that stupid thing.... Whatwill happen now?”
“To whom, to whom?” cried Lise. “Mamma, you really want to be the death ofme. I ask you and you don’t answer.”
At the moment the maid ran in.
“Katerina Ivanovna is ill.... She is crying, struggling ... hysterics.”
“What is the matter?” cried Lise, in a tone of real anxiety. “Mamma, Ishall be having hysterics, and not she!”
“Lise, for mercy’s sake, don’t scream, don’t persecute me. At your age onecan’t know everything that grown‐up people know. I’ll come and tell youeverything you ought to know. Oh, mercy on us! I am coming, I amcoming.... Hysterics is a good sign, Alexey Fyodorovitch; it’s anexcellent thing that she is hysterical. That’s just as it ought to be. Insuch cases I am always against the woman, against all these feminine tearsand hysterics. Run and say, Yulia, that I’ll fly to her. As for IvanFyodorovitch’s going away like that, it’s her own fault. But he won’t goaway. Lise, for mercy’s sake, don’t scream! Oh, yes; you are notscreaming. It’s I am screaming. Forgive your mamma; but I am delighted,delighted, delighted! Did you notice, Alexey Fyodorovitch, how young, howyoung Ivan Fyodorovitch was just now when he went out, when he said allthat and went out? I thought he was so learned, such a _savant_, and allof a sudden he behaved so warmly, openly, and youthfully, with suchyouthful inexperience, and it was all so fine, like you.... And the way herepeated that German verse, it was just like you! But I must fly, I mustfly! Alexey Fyodorovitch, make haste to carry out her commission, and thenmake haste back. Lise, do you want anything now? For mercy’s sake, don’tkeep Alexey Fyodorovitch a minute. He will come back to you at once.”
Madame Hohlakov at last ran off. Before leaving, Alyosha would have openedthe door to see Lise.
“On no account,” cried Lise. “On no account now. Speak through the door.How have you come to be an angel? That’s the only thing I want to know.”
“For an awful piece of stupidity, Lise! Good‐by!”
“Don’t dare to go away like that!” Lise was beginning.
“Lise, I have a real sorrow! I’ll be back directly, but I have a great,great sorrow!”
And he ran out of the room.


Chapter VI. A Laceration In The Cottage

He certainly was really grieved in a way he had seldom been before. He hadrushed in like a fool, and meddled in what? In a love‐affair. “But what doI know about it? What can I tell about such things?” he repeated tohimself for the hundredth time, flushing crimson. “Oh, being ashamed wouldbe nothing; shame is only the punishment I deserve. The trouble is I shallcertainly have caused more unhappiness.... And Father Zossima sent me toreconcile and bring them together. Is this the way to bring themtogether?” Then he suddenly remembered how he had tried to join theirhands, and he felt fearfully ashamed again. “Though I acted quitesincerely, I must be more sensible in the future,” he concluded suddenly,and did not even smile at his conclusion.
Katerina Ivanovna’s commission took him to Lake Street, and his brotherDmitri lived close by, in a turning out of Lake Street. Alyosha decided togo to him in any case before going to the captain, though he had apresentiment that he would not find his brother. He suspected that hewould intentionally keep out of his way now, but he must find him anyhow.Time was passing: the thought of his dying elder had not left Alyosha forone minute from the time he set off from the monastery.
There was one point which interested him particularly about KaterinaIvanovna’s commission; when she had mentioned the captain’s son, thelittle schoolboy who had run beside his father crying, the idea had atonce struck Alyosha that this must be the schoolboy who had bitten hisfinger when he, Alyosha, asked him what he had done to hurt him. NowAlyosha felt practically certain of this, though he could not have saidwhy. Thinking of another subject was a relief, and he resolved to think nomore about the “mischief” he had done, and not to torture himself withremorse, but to do what he had to do, let come what would. At that thoughthe was completely comforted. Turning to the street where Dmitri lodged, hefelt hungry, and taking out of his pocket the roll he had brought from hisfather’s, he ate it. It made him feel stronger.
Dmitri was not at home. The people of the house, an old cabinet‐maker, hisson, and his old wife, looked with positive suspicion at Alyosha. “Hehasn’t slept here for the last three nights. Maybe he has gone away,” theold man said in answer to Alyosha’s persistent inquiries. Alyosha saw thathe was answering in accordance with instructions. When he asked whether hewere not at Grushenka’s or in hiding at Foma’s (Alyosha spoke so freely onpurpose), all three looked at him in alarm. “They are fond of him, theyare doing their best for him,” thought Alyosha. “That’s good.”
At last he found the house in Lake Street. It was a decrepit little house,sunk on one side, with three windows looking into the street, and with amuddy yard, in the middle of which stood a solitary cow. He crossed theyard and found the door opening into the passage. On the left of thepassage lived the old woman of the house with her old daughter. Bothseemed to be deaf. In answer to his repeated inquiry for the captain, oneof them at last understood that he was asking for their lodgers, andpointed to a door across the passage. The captain’s lodging turned out tobe a simple cottage room. Alyosha had his hand on the iron latch to openthe door, when he was struck by the strange hush within. Yet he knew fromKaterina Ivanovna’s words that the man had a family. “Either they are allasleep or perhaps they have heard me coming and are waiting for me to openthe door. I’d better knock first,” and he knocked. An answer came, but notat once, after an interval of perhaps ten seconds.
“Who’s there?” shouted some one in a loud and very angry voice.
Then Alyosha opened the door and crossed the threshold. He found himselfin a regular peasant’s room. Though it was large, it was cumbered up withdomestic belongings of all sorts, and there were several people in it. Onthe left was a large Russian stove. From the stove to the window on theleft was a string running across the room, and on it there were ragshanging. There was a bedstead against the wall on each side, right andleft, covered with knitted quilts. On the one on the left was a pyramid offour print‐covered pillows, each smaller than the one beneath. On theother there was only one very small pillow. The opposite corner wasscreened off by a curtain or a sheet hung on a string. Behind this curtaincould be seen a bed made up on a bench and a chair. The rough square tableof plain wood had been moved into the middle window. The three windows,which consisted each of four tiny greenish mildewy panes, gave littlelight, and were close shut, so that the room was not very light and ratherstuffy. On the table was a frying‐pan with the remains of some fried eggs,a half‐eaten piece of bread, and a small bottle with a few drops of vodka.
A woman of genteel appearance, wearing a cotton gown, was sitting on achair by the bed on the left. Her face was thin and yellow, and her sunkencheeks betrayed at the first glance that she was ill. But what struckAlyosha most was the expression in the poor woman’s eyes—a look ofsurprised inquiry and yet of haughty pride. And while he was talking toher husband, her big brown eyes moved from one speaker to the other withthe same haughty and questioning expression. Beside her at the windowstood a young girl, rather plain, with scanty reddish hair, poorly butvery neatly dressed. She looked disdainfully at Alyosha as he came in.Beside the other bed was sitting another female figure. She was a very sadsight, a young girl of about twenty, but hunchback and crippled “withwithered legs,” as Alyosha was told afterwards. Her crutches stood in thecorner close by. The strikingly beautiful and gentle eyes of this poorgirl looked with mild serenity at Alyosha. A man of forty‐five was sittingat the table, finishing the fried eggs. He was spare, small and weaklybuilt. He had reddish hair and a scanty light‐colored beard, very muchlike a wisp of tow (this comparison and the phrase “a wisp of tow” flashedat once into Alyosha’s mind for some reason, he remembered it afterwards).It was obviously this gentleman who had shouted to him, as there was noother man in the room. But when Alyosha went in, he leapt up from thebench on which he was sitting, and, hastily wiping his mouth with a raggednapkin, darted up to Alyosha.
“It’s a monk come to beg for the monastery. A nice place to come to!” thegirl standing in the left corner said aloud. The man spun round instantlytowards her and answered her in an excited and breaking voice:
“No, Varvara, you are wrong. Allow me to ask,” he turned again to Alyosha,“what has brought you to—our retreat?”
Alyosha looked attentively at him. It was the first time he had seen him.There was something angular, flurried and irritable about him. Though hehad obviously just been drinking, he was not drunk. There wasextraordinary impudence in his expression, and yet, strange to say, at thesame time there was fear. He looked like a man who had long been kept insubjection and had submitted to it, and now had suddenly turned and wastrying to assert himself. Or, better still, like a man who wantsdreadfully to hit you but is horribly afraid you will hit him. In hiswords and in the intonation of his shrill voice there was a sort of crazyhumor, at times spiteful and at times cringing, and continually shiftingfrom one tone to another. The question about “our retreat” he had asked asit were quivering all over, rolling his eyes, and skipping up so close toAlyosha that he instinctively drew back a step. He was dressed in a veryshabby dark cotton coat, patched and spotted. He wore checked trousers ofan extremely light color, long out of fashion, and of very thin material.They were so crumpled and so short that he looked as though he had grownout of them like a boy.
“I am Alexey Karamazov,” Alyosha began in reply.
“I quite understand that, sir,” the gentleman snapped out at once toassure him that he knew who he was already. “I am Captain Snegiryov, sir,but I am still desirous to know precisely what has led you—”
“Oh, I’ve come for nothing special. I wanted to have a word with you—ifonly you allow me.”
“In that case, here is a chair, sir; kindly be seated. That’s what theyused to say in the old comedies, ‘kindly be seated,’ ” and with a rapidgesture he seized an empty chair (it was a rough wooden chair, notupholstered) and set it for him almost in the middle of the room; then,taking another similar chair for himself, he sat down facing Alyosha, soclose to him that their knees almost touched.
“Nikolay Ilyitch Snegiryov, sir, formerly a captain in the Russianinfantry, put to shame for his vices, but still a captain. Though I mightnot be one now for the way I talk; for the last half of my life I’velearnt to say ‘sir.’ It’s a word you use when you’ve come down in theworld.”
“That’s very true,” smiled Alyosha. “But is it used involuntarily or onpurpose?”
“As God’s above, it’s involuntary, and I usen’t to use it! I didn’t usethe word ‘sir’ all my life, but as soon as I sank into low water I beganto say ‘sir.’ It’s the work of a higher power. I see you are interested incontemporary questions, but how can I have excited your curiosity, livingas I do in surroundings impossible for the exercise of hospitality?”
“I’ve come—about that business.”
“About what business?” the captain interrupted impatiently.
“About your meeting with my brother Dmitri Fyodorovitch,” Alyosha blurtedout awkwardly.
“What meeting, sir? You don’t mean that meeting? About my ‘wisp of tow,’then?” He moved closer so that his knees positively knocked againstAlyosha. His lips were strangely compressed like a thread.
“What wisp of tow?” muttered Alyosha.
“He is come to complain of me, father!” cried a voice familiar toAlyosha—the voice of the schoolboy—from behind the curtain. “I bit hisfinger just now.” The curtain was pulled, and Alyosha saw his assailantlying on a little bed made up on the bench and the chair in the cornerunder the ikons. The boy lay covered by his coat and an old wadded quilt.He was evidently unwell, and, judging by his glittering eyes, he was in afever. He looked at Alyosha without fear, as though he felt he was at homeand could not be touched.
“What! Did he bite your finger?” The captain jumped up from his chair.“Was it your finger he bit?”
“Yes. He was throwing stones with other schoolboys. There were six of themagainst him alone. I went up to him, and he threw a stone at me and thenanother at my head. I asked him what I had done to him. And then he rushedat me and bit my finger badly, I don’t know why.”
“I’ll thrash him, sir, at once—this minute!” The captain jumped up fromhis seat.
“But I am not complaining at all, I am simply telling you ... I don’t wanthim to be thrashed. Besides, he seems to be ill.”
“And do you suppose I’d thrash him? That I’d take my Ilusha and thrash himbefore you for your satisfaction? Would you like it done at once, sir?”said the captain, suddenly turning to Alyosha, as though he were going toattack him. “I am sorry about your finger, sir; but instead of thrashingIlusha, would you like me to chop off my four fingers with this knife herebefore your eyes to satisfy your just wrath? I should think four fingerswould be enough to satisfy your thirst for vengeance. You won’t ask forthe fifth one too?” He stopped short with a catch in his throat. Everyfeature in his face was twitching and working; he looked extremelydefiant. He was in a sort of frenzy.
“I think I understand it all now,” said Alyosha gently and sorrowfully,still keeping his seat. “So your boy is a good boy, he loves his father,and he attacked me as the brother of your assailant.... Now I understandit,” he repeated thoughtfully. “But my brother Dmitri Fyodorovitch regretshis action, I know that, and if only it is possible for him to come toyou, or better still, to meet you in that same place, he will ask yourforgiveness before every one—if you wish it.”
“After pulling out my beard, you mean, he will ask my forgiveness? And hethinks that will be a satisfactory finish, doesn’t he?”
“Oh, no! On the contrary, he will do anything you like and in any way youlike.”
“So if I were to ask his highness to go down on his knees before me inthat very tavern—‘The Metropolis’ it’s called—or in the market‐place, hewould do it?”
“Yes, he would even go down on his knees.”
“You’ve pierced me to the heart, sir. Touched me to tears and pierced meto the heart! I am only too sensible of your brother’s generosity. Allowme to introduce my family, my two daughters and my son—my litter. If Idie, who will care for them, and while I live who but they will care for awretch like me? That’s a great thing the Lord has ordained for every manof my sort, sir. For there must be some one able to love even a man likeme.”
“Ah, that’s perfectly true!” exclaimed Alyosha.
“Oh, do leave off playing the fool! Some idiot comes in, and you put us toshame!” cried the girl by the window, suddenly turning to her father witha disdainful and contemptuous air.
“Wait a little, Varvara!” cried her father, speaking peremptorily butlooking at her quite approvingly. “That’s her character,” he said,addressing Alyosha again.

    “And in all nature there was naught    That could find favor in his eyes—

or rather in the feminine: that could find favor in her eyes. But now letme present you to my wife, Arina Petrovna. She is crippled, she is forty‐three; she can move, but very little. She is of humble origin. ArinaPetrovna, compose your countenance. This is Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov.Get up, Alexey Fyodorovitch.” He took him by the hand and with unexpectedforce pulled him up. “You must stand up to be introduced to a lady. It’snot the Karamazov, mamma, who ... h’m ... etcetera, but his brother,radiant with modest virtues. Come, Arina Petrovna, come, mamma, first yourhand to be kissed.”
And he kissed his wife’s hand respectfully and even tenderly. The girl atthe window turned her back indignantly on the scene; an expression ofextraordinary cordiality came over the haughtily inquiring face of thewoman.
“Good morning! Sit down, Mr. Tchernomazov,” she said.
“Karamazov, mamma, Karamazov. We are of humble origin,” he whisperedagain.
“Well, Karamazov, or whatever it is, but I always think ofTchernomazov.... Sit down. Why has he pulled you up? He calls me crippled,but I am not, only my legs are swollen like barrels, and I am shriveled upmyself. Once I used to be so fat, but now it’s as though I had swallowed aneedle.”
“We are of humble origin,” the captain muttered again.
“Oh, father, father!” the hunchback girl, who had till then been silent onher chair, said suddenly, and she hid her eyes in her handkerchief.
“Buffoon!” blurted out the girl at the window.
“Have you heard our news?” said the mother, pointing at her daughters.“It’s like clouds coming over; the clouds pass and we have music again.When we were with the army, we used to have many such guests. I don’t meanto make any comparisons; every one to their taste. The deacon’s wife usedto come then and say, ‘Alexandr Alexandrovitch is a man of the noblestheart, but Nastasya Petrovna,’ she would say, ‘is of the brood of hell.’‘Well,’ I said, ‘that’s a matter of taste; but you are a little spitfire.’‘And you want keeping in your place,’ says she. ‘You black sword,’ said I,‘who asked you to teach me?’ ‘But my breath,’ says she, ‘is clean, andyours is unclean.’ ‘You ask all the officers whether my breath isunclean.’ And ever since then I had it in my mind. Not long ago I wassitting here as I am now, when I saw that very general come in who camehere for Easter, and I asked him: ‘Your Excellency,’ said I, ‘can a lady’sbreath be unpleasant?’ ‘Yes,’ he answered; ‘you ought to open a window‐pane or open the door, for the air is not fresh here.’ And they all go onlike that! And what is my breath to them? The dead smell worse still! ‘Iwon’t spoil the air,’ said I, ‘I’ll order some slippers and go away.’ Mydarlings, don’t blame your own mother! Nikolay Ilyitch, how is it I can’tplease you? There’s only Ilusha who comes home from school and loves me.Yesterday he brought me an apple. Forgive your own mother—forgive a poorlonely creature! Why has my breath become unpleasant to you?”
And the poor mad woman broke into sobs, and tears streamed down hercheeks. The captain rushed up to her.
“Mamma, mamma, my dear, give over! You are not lonely. Every one lovesyou, every one adores you.” He began kissing both her hands again andtenderly stroking her face; taking the dinner‐napkin, he began wiping awayher tears. Alyosha fancied that he too had tears in his eyes. “There, yousee, you hear?” he turned with a sort of fury to Alyosha, pointing to thepoor imbecile.
“I see and hear,” muttered Alyosha.
“Father, father, how can you—with him! Let him alone!” cried the boy,sitting up in his bed and gazing at his father with glowing eyes.
“Do give over fooling, showing off your silly antics which never lead toanything!” shouted Varvara, stamping her foot with passion.
“Your anger is quite just this time, Varvara, and I’ll make haste tosatisfy you. Come, put on your cap, Alexey Fyodorovitch, and I’ll put onmine. We will go out. I have a word to say to you in earnest, but notwithin these walls. This girl sitting here is my daughter Nina; I forgotto introduce her to you. She is a heavenly angel incarnate ... who hasflown down to us mortals,... if you can understand.”
“There he is shaking all over, as though he is in convulsions!” Varvarawent on indignantly.
“And she there stamping her foot at me and calling me a fool just now, sheis a heavenly angel incarnate too, and she has good reason to call me so.Come along, Alexey Fyodorovitch, we must make an end.”
And, snatching Alyosha’s hand, he drew him out of the room into thestreet.


Chapter VII. And In The Open Air

“The air is fresh, but in my apartment it is not so in any sense of theword. Let us walk slowly, sir. I should be glad of your kind interest.”
“I too have something important to say to you,” observed Alyosha, “only Idon’t know how to begin.”
“To be sure you must have business with me. You would never have looked inupon me without some object. Unless you come simply to complain of theboy, and that’s hardly likely. And, by the way, about the boy: I could notexplain to you in there, but here I will describe that scene to you. Mytow was thicker a week ago—I mean my beard. That’s the nickname they giveto my beard, the schoolboys most of all. Well, your brother DmitriFyodorovitch was pulling me by my beard, I’d done nothing, he was in atowering rage and happened to come upon me. He dragged me out of thetavern into the market‐place; at that moment the boys were coming out ofschool, and with them Ilusha. As soon as he saw me in such a state herushed up to me. ‘Father,’ he cried, ‘father!’ He caught hold of me,hugged me, tried to pull me away, crying to my assailant, ‘Let go, let go,it’s my father, forgive him!’—yes, he actually cried ‘forgive him.’ Heclutched at that hand, that very hand, in his little hands and kissedit.... I remember his little face at that moment, I haven’t forgotten itand I never shall!”
“I swear,” cried Alyosha, “that my brother will express his most deep andsincere regret, even if he has to go down on his knees in that samemarket‐place.... I’ll make him or he is no brother of mine!”
“Aha, then it’s only a suggestion! And it does not come from him butsimply from the generosity of your own warm heart. You should have saidso. No, in that case allow me to tell you of your brother’s highlychivalrous soldierly generosity, for he did give expression to it at thetime. He left off dragging me by my beard and released me: ‘You are anofficer,’ he said, ‘and I am an officer, if you can find a decent man tobe your second send me your challenge. I will give satisfaction, thoughyou are a scoundrel.’ That’s what he said. A chivalrous spirit indeed! Iretired with Ilusha, and that scene is a family record imprinted for everon Ilusha’s soul. No, it’s not for us to claim the privileges of noblemen.Judge for yourself. You’ve just been in our mansion, what did you seethere? Three ladies, one a cripple and weak‐minded, another a cripple andhunchback and the third not crippled but far too clever. She is a student,dying to get back to Petersburg, to work for the emancipation of theRussian woman on the banks of the Neva. I won’t speak of Ilusha, he isonly nine. I am alone in the world, and if I die, what will become of allof them? I simply ask you that. And if I challenge him and he kills me onthe spot, what then? What will become of them? And worse still, if hedoesn’t kill me but only cripples me: I couldn’t work, but I should stillbe a mouth to feed. Who would feed it and who would feed them all? Must Itake Ilusha from school and send him to beg in the streets? That’s what itmeans for me to challenge him to a duel. It’s silly talk and nothingelse.”
“He will beg your forgiveness, he will bow down at your feet in the middleof the market‐place,” cried Alyosha again, with glowing eyes.
“I did think of prosecuting him,” the captain went on, “but look in ourcode, could I get much compensation for a personal injury? And thenAgrafena Alexandrovna sent for me and shouted at me: ‘Don’t dare todream of it! If you proceed against him, I’ll publish it to all the worldthat he beat you for your dishonesty, and then you will be prosecuted.’ Icall God to witness whose was the dishonesty and by whose commands Iacted, wasn’t it by her own and Fyodor Pavlovitch’s? ‘And what’s more,’she went on, ‘I’ll dismiss you for good and you’ll never earn anotherpenny from me. I’ll speak to my merchant too’ (that’s what she calls herold man) ‘and he will dismiss you!’ And if he dismisses me, what can Iearn then from any one? Those two are all I have to look to, for yourFyodor Pavlovitch has not only given over employing me, for anotherreason, but he means to make use of papers I’ve signed to go to lawagainst me. And so I kept quiet, and you have seen our retreat. But nowlet me ask you: did Ilusha hurt your finger much? I didn’t like to go intoit in our mansion before him.”
“Yes, very much, and he was in a great fury. He was avenging you on me asa Karamazov, I see that now. But if only you had seen how he was throwingstones at his school‐fellows! It’s very dangerous. They might kill him.They are children and stupid. A stone may be thrown and break somebody’shead.”
“That’s just what has happened. He has been bruised by a stone to‐day. Noton the head but on the chest, just above the heart. He came home cryingand groaning and now he is ill.”
“And you know he attacks them first. He is bitter against them on youraccount. They say he stabbed a boy called Krassotkin with a pen‐knife notlong ago.”
“I’ve heard about that too, it’s dangerous. Krassotkin is an officialhere, we may hear more about it.”
“I would advise you,” Alyosha went on warmly, “not to send him to schoolat all for a time till he is calmer ... and his anger is passed.”
“Anger!” the captain repeated, “that’s just what it is. He is a littlecreature, but it’s a mighty anger. You don’t know all, sir. Let me tellyou more. Since that incident all the boys have been teasing him about the‘wisp of tow.’ Schoolboys are a merciless race, individually they areangels, but together, especially in schools, they are often merciless.Their teasing has stirred up a gallant spirit in Ilusha. An ordinary boy,a weak son, would have submitted, have felt ashamed of his father, sir,but he stood up for his father against them all. For his father and fortruth and justice. For what he suffered when he kissed your brother’s handand cried to him ‘Forgive father, forgive him,’—that only God knows—and I,his father. For our children—not your children, but ours—the children ofthe poor gentlemen looked down upon by every one—know what justice means,sir, even at nine years old. How should the rich know? They don’t exploresuch depths once in their lives. But at that moment in the square when hekissed his hand, at that moment my Ilusha had grasped all that justicemeans. That truth entered into him and crushed him for ever, sir,” thecaptain said hotly again with a sort of frenzy, and he struck his rightfist against his left palm as though he wanted to show how “the truth”crushed Ilusha. “That very day, sir, he fell ill with fever and wasdelirious all night. All that day he hardly said a word to me, but Inoticed he kept watching me from the corner, though he turned to thewindow and pretended to be learning his lessons. But I could see his mindwas not on his lessons. Next day I got drunk to forget my troubles, sinfulman as I am, and I don’t remember much. Mamma began crying, too—I am veryfond of mamma—well, I spent my last penny drowning my troubles. Don’tdespise me for that, sir, in Russia men who drink are the best. The bestmen amongst us are the greatest drunkards. I lay down and I don’t rememberabout Ilusha, though all that day the boys had been jeering at him atschool. ‘Wisp of tow,’ they shouted, ‘your father was pulled out of thetavern by his wisp of tow, you ran by and begged forgiveness.’ ”
“On the third day when he came back from school, I saw he looked pale andwretched. ‘What is it?’ I asked. He wouldn’t answer. Well, there’s notalking in our mansion without mamma and the girls taking part in it.What’s more, the girls had heard about it the very first day. Varvara hadbegun snarling. ‘You fools and buffoons, can you ever do anythingrational?’ ‘Quite so,’ I said, ‘can we ever do anything rational?’ For thetime I turned it off like that. So in the evening I took the boy out for awalk, for you must know we go for a walk every evening, always the sameway, along which we are going now—from our gate to that great stone whichlies alone in the road under the hurdle, which marks the beginning of thetown pasture. A beautiful and lonely spot, sir. Ilusha and I walked alonghand in hand as usual. He has a little hand, his fingers are thin andcold—he suffers with his chest, you know. ‘Father,’ said he, ‘father!’‘Well?’ said I. I saw his eyes flashing. ‘Father, how he treated youthen!’ ‘It can’t be helped, Ilusha,’ I said. ‘Don’t forgive him, father,don’t forgive him! At school they say that he has paid you ten roubles forit.’ ‘No, Ilusha,’ said I, ‘I would not take money from him for anything.’Then he began trembling all over, took my hand in both his and kissed itagain. ‘Father,’ he said, ‘father, challenge him to a duel, at school theysay you are a coward and won’t challenge him, and that you’ll accept tenroubles from him.’ ‘I can’t challenge him to a duel, Ilusha,’ I answered.And I told briefly what I’ve just told you. He listened. ‘Father,’ hesaid, ‘anyway don’t forgive it. When I grow up I’ll call him out myselfand kill him.’ His eyes shone and glowed. And of course I am his father,and I had to put in a word: ‘It’s a sin to kill,’ I said, ‘even in aduel.’ ‘Father,’ he said, ‘when I grow up, I’ll knock him down, knock thesword out of his hand, I’ll fall on him, wave my sword over him and say:“I could kill you, but I forgive you, so there!” ’ You see what theworkings of his little mind have been during these two days; he must havebeen planning that vengeance all day, and raving about it at night.
“But he began to come home from school badly beaten, I found out about itthe day before yesterday, and you are right, I won’t send him to thatschool any more. I heard that he was standing up against all the classalone and defying them all, that his heart was full of resentment, ofbitterness—I was alarmed about him. We went for another walk. ‘Father,’ heasked, ‘are the rich people stronger than any one else on earth?’ ‘Yes,Ilusha,’ I said, ‘there are no people on earth stronger than the rich.’‘Father,’ he said, ‘I will get rich, I will become an officer and conquereverybody. The Tsar will reward me, I will come back here and then no onewill dare—’ Then he was silent and his lips still kept trembling.‘Father,’ he said, ‘what a horrid town this is.’ ‘Yes, Ilusha,’ I said,‘it isn’t a very nice town.’ ‘Father, let us move into another town, anice one,’ he said, ‘where people don’t know about us.’ ‘We will move, wewill, Ilusha,’ said I, ‘only I must save up for it.’ I was glad to be ableto turn his mind from painful thoughts, and we began to dream of how wewould move to another town, how we would buy a horse and cart. ‘We willput mamma and your sisters inside, we will cover them up and we’ll walk,you shall have a lift now and then, and I’ll walk beside, for we must takecare of our horse, we can’t all ride. That’s how we’ll go.’ He wasenchanted at that, most of all at the thought of having a horse anddriving him. For of course a Russian boy is born among horses. Wechattered a long while. Thank God, I thought, I have diverted his mind andcomforted him.
“That was the day before yesterday, in the evening, but last nighteverything was changed. He had gone to school in the morning, he came backdepressed, terribly depressed. In the evening I took him by the hand andwe went for a walk; he would not talk. There was a wind blowing and nosun, and a feeling of autumn; twilight was coming on. We walked along,both of us depressed. ‘Well, my boy,’ said I, ‘how about our setting offon our travels?’ I thought I might bring him back to our talk of the daybefore. He didn’t answer, but I felt his fingers trembling in my hand. Ah,I thought, it’s a bad job; there’s something fresh. We had reached thestone where we are now. I sat down on the stone. And in the air there werelots of kites flapping and whirling. There were as many as thirty insight. Of course, it’s just the season for the kites. ‘Look, Ilusha,’ saidI, ‘it’s time we got out our last year’s kite again. I’ll mend it, wherehave you put it away?’ My boy made no answer. He looked away and turnedsideways to me. And then a gust of wind blew up the sand. He suddenly fellon me, threw both his little arms round my neck and held me tight. Youknow, when children are silent and proud, and try to keep back their tearswhen they are in great trouble and suddenly break down, their tears fallin streams. With those warm streams of tears, he suddenly wetted my face.He sobbed and shook as though he were in convulsions, and squeezed upagainst me as I sat on the stone. ‘Father,’ he kept crying, ‘dear father,how he insulted you!’ And I sobbed too. We sat shaking in each other’sarms. ‘Ilusha,’ I said to him, ‘Ilusha darling.’ No one saw us then. Godalone saw us, I hope He will record it to my credit. You must thank yourbrother, Alexey Fyodorovitch. No, sir, I won’t thrash my boy for yoursatisfaction.”
He had gone back to his original tone of resentful buffoonery. Alyoshafelt though that he trusted him, and that if there had been some one elsein his, Alyosha’s place, the man would not have spoken so openly and wouldnot have told what he had just told. This encouraged Alyosha, whose heartwas trembling on the verge of tears.
“Ah, how I would like to make friends with your boy!” he cried. “If youcould arrange it—”
“Certainly, sir,” muttered the captain.
“But now listen to something quite different!” Alyosha went on. “I have amessage for you. That same brother of mine, Dmitri, has insulted hisbetrothed, too, a noble‐hearted girl of whom you have probably heard. Ihave a right to tell you of her wrong; I ought to do so, in fact, forhearing of the insult done to you and learning all about your unfortunateposition, she commissioned me at once—just now—to bring you this help fromher—but only from her alone, not from Dmitri, who has abandoned her. Norfrom me, his brother, nor from any one else, but from her, only from her!She entreats you to accept her help.... You have both been insulted by thesame man. She thought of you only when she had just received a similarinsult from him—similar in its cruelty, I mean. She comes like a sister tohelp a brother in misfortune.... She told me to persuade you to take thesetwo hundred roubles from her, as from a sister, knowing that you are insuch need. No one will know of it, it can give rise to no unjust slander.There are the two hundred roubles, and I swear you must take themunless—unless all men are to be enemies on earth! But there are brotherseven on earth.... You have a generous heart ... you must see that, youmust,” and Alyosha held out two new rainbow‐colored hundred‐rouble notes.
They were both standing at the time by the great stone close to the fence,and there was no one near. The notes seemed to produce a tremendousimpression on the captain. He started, but at first only fromastonishment. Such an outcome of their conversation was the last thing heexpected. Nothing could have been farther from his dreams than help fromany one—and such a sum!
He took the notes, and for a minute he was almost unable to answer, quitea new expression came into his face.
“That for me? So much money—two hundred roubles! Good heavens! Why, Ihaven’t seen so much money for the last four years! Mercy on us! And shesays she is a sister.... And is that the truth?”
“I swear that all I told you is the truth,” cried Alyosha.
The captain flushed red.
“Listen, my dear, listen. If I take it, I shan’t be behaving like ascoundrel? In your eyes, Alexey Fyodorovitch, I shan’t be a scoundrel? No,Alexey Fyodorovitch, listen, listen,” he hurried, touching Alyosha withboth his hands. “You are persuading me to take it, saying that it’s asister sends it, but inwardly, in your heart won’t you feel contempt forme if I take it, eh?”
“No, no, on my salvation I swear I shan’t! And no one will ever know butme—I, you and she, and one other lady, her great friend.”
“Never mind the lady! Listen, Alexey Fyodorovitch, at a moment like thisyou must listen, for you can’t understand what these two hundred roublesmean to me now.” The poor fellow went on rising gradually into a sort ofincoherent, almost wild enthusiasm. He was thrown off his balance andtalked extremely fast, as though afraid he would not be allowed to say allhe had to say.
“Besides its being honestly acquired from a ‘sister,’ so highly respectedand revered, do you know that now I can look after mamma and Nina, myhunchback angel daughter? Doctor Herzenstube came to me in the kindness ofhis heart and was examining them both for a whole hour. ‘I can makenothing of it,’ said he, but he prescribed a mineral water which is keptat a chemist’s here. He said it would be sure to do her good, and heordered baths, too, with some medicine in them. The mineral water coststhirty copecks, and she’d need to drink forty bottles perhaps; so I tookthe prescription and laid it on the shelf under the ikons, and there itlies. And he ordered hot baths for Nina with something dissolved in them,morning and evening. But how can we carry out such a cure in our mansion,without servants, without help, without a bath, and without water? Nina isrheumatic all over, I don’t think I told you that. All her right sideaches at night, she is in agony, and, would you believe it, the angelbears it without groaning for fear of waking us. We eat what we can get,and she’ll only take the leavings, what you’d scarcely give to a dog. ‘Iam not worth it, I am taking it from you, I am a burden on you,’ that’swhat her angel eyes try to express. We wait on her, but she doesn’t likeit. ‘I am a useless cripple, no good to any one.’ As though she were notworth it, when she is the saving of all of us with her angelic sweetness.Without her, without her gentle word it would be hell among us! Shesoftens even Varvara. And don’t judge Varvara harshly either, she is anangel too, she, too, has suffered wrong. She came to us for the summer,and she brought sixteen roubles she had earned by lessons and saved up, togo back with to Petersburg in September, that is now. But we took hermoney and lived on it, so now she has nothing to go back with. Thoughindeed she couldn’t go back, for she has to work for us like a slave. Sheis like an overdriven horse with all of us on her back. She waits on usall, mends and washes, sweeps the floor, puts mamma to bed. And mamma iscapricious and tearful and insane! And now I can get a servant with thismoney, you understand, Alexey Fyodorovitch, I can get medicines for thedear creatures, I can send my student to Petersburg, I can buy beef, I canfeed them properly. Good Lord, but it’s a dream!”
Alyosha was delighted that he had brought him such happiness and that thepoor fellow had consented to be made happy.
“Stay, Alexey Fyodorovitch, stay,” the captain began to talk with frenziedrapidity, carried away by a new day‐dream. “Do you know that Ilusha and Iwill perhaps really carry out our dream. We will buy a horse and cart, ablack horse, he insists on its being black, and we will set off as wepretended the other day. I have an old friend, a lawyer in K. province,and I heard through a trustworthy man that if I were to go he’d give me aplace as clerk in his office, so, who knows, maybe he would. So I’d justput mamma and Nina in the cart, and Ilusha could drive, and I’d walk, I’dwalk.... Why, if I only succeed in getting one debt paid that’s owing me,I should have perhaps enough for that too!”
“There would be enough!” cried Alyosha. “Katerina Ivanovna will send youas much more as you need, and you know, I have money too, take what youwant, as you would from a brother, from a friend, you can give it backlater.... (You’ll get rich, you’ll get rich!) And you know you couldn’thave a better idea than to move to another province! It would be thesaving of you, especially of your boy—and you ought to go quickly, beforethe winter, before the cold. You must write to us when you are there, andwe will always be brothers.... No, it’s not a dream!”
Alyosha could have hugged him, he was so pleased. But glancing at him hestopped short. The man was standing with his neck outstretched and hislips protruding, with a pale and frenzied face. His lips were moving asthough trying to articulate something; no sound came, but still his lipsmoved. It was uncanny.
“What is it?” asked Alyosha, startled.
“Alexey Fyodorovitch ... I ... you,” muttered the captain, faltering,looking at him with a strange, wild, fixed stare, and an air of desperateresolution. At the same time there was a sort of grin on his lips. “I ...you, sir ... wouldn’t you like me to show you a little trick I know?” hemurmured, suddenly, in a firm rapid whisper, his voice no longerfaltering.
“What trick?”
“A pretty trick,” whispered the captain. His mouth was twisted on the leftside, his left eye was screwed up. He still stared at Alyosha.
“What is the matter? What trick?” Alyosha cried, now thoroughly alarmed.
“Why, look,” squealed the captain suddenly, and showing him the two noteswhich he had been holding by one corner between his thumb and forefingerduring the conversation, he crumpled them up savagely and squeezed themtight in his right hand. “Do you see, do you see?” he shrieked, pale andinfuriated. And suddenly flinging up his hand, he threw the crumpled noteson the sand. “Do you see?” he shrieked again, pointing to them. “Lookthere!”
And with wild fury he began trampling them under his heel, gasping andexclaiming as he did so:
“So much for your money! So much for your money! So much for your money!So much for your money!”
Suddenly he darted back and drew himself up before Alyosha, and his wholefigure expressed unutterable pride.
“Tell those who sent you that the wisp of tow does not sell his honor,” hecried, raising his arm in the air. Then he turned quickly and began torun; but he had not run five steps before he turned completely round andkissed his hand to Alyosha. He ran another five paces and then turnedround for the last time. This time his face was not contorted withlaughter, but quivering all over with tears. In a tearful, faltering,sobbing voice he cried:
“What should I say to my boy if I took money from you for our shame?”
And then he ran on without turning. Alyosha looked after him,inexpressibly grieved. Oh, he saw that till the very last moment the manhad not known he would crumple up and fling away the notes. He did notturn back. Alyosha knew he would not. He would not follow him and call himback, he knew why. When he was out of sight, Alyosha picked up the twonotes. They were very much crushed and crumpled, and had been pressed intothe sand, but were uninjured and even rustled like new ones when Alyoshaunfolded them and smoothed them out. After smoothing them out, he foldedthem up, put them in his pocket and went to Katerina Ivanovna to report onthe success of her commission.



Book V. Pro And Contra


Chapter I. The Engagement

Madame Hohlakov was again the first to meet Alyosha. She was flustered;something important had happened. Katerina Ivanovna’s hysterics had endedin a fainting fit, and then “a terrible, awful weakness had followed, shelay with her eyes turned up and was delirious. Now she was in a fever.They had sent for Herzenstube; they had sent for the aunts. The aunts werealready here, but Herzenstube had not yet come. They were all sitting inher room, waiting. She was unconscious now, and what if it turned to brainfever!”
Madame Hohlakov looked gravely alarmed. “This is serious, serious,” sheadded at every word, as though nothing that had happened to her before hadbeen serious. Alyosha listened with distress, and was beginning todescribe his adventures, but she interrupted him at the first words. Shehad not time to listen. She begged him to sit with Lise and wait for herthere.
“Lise,” she whispered almost in his ear, “Lise has greatly surprised mejust now, dear Alexey Fyodorovitch. She touched me, too, and so my heartforgives her everything. Only fancy, as soon as you had gone, she began tobe truly remorseful for having laughed at you to‐day and yesterday, thoughshe was not laughing at you, but only joking. But she was seriously sorryfor it, almost ready to cry, so that I was quite surprised. She has neverbeen really sorry for laughing at me, but has only made a joke of it. Andyou know she is laughing at me every minute. But this time she was inearnest. She thinks a great deal of your opinion, Alexey Fyodorovitch, anddon’t take offense or be wounded by her if you can help it. I am neverhard upon her, for she’s such a clever little thing. Would you believe it?She said just now that you were a friend of her childhood, ‘the greatestfriend of her childhood’—just think of that—‘greatest friend’—and whatabout me? She has very strong feelings and memories, and, what’s more, sheuses these phrases, most unexpected words, which come out all of a suddenwhen you least expect them. She spoke lately about a pine‐tree, forinstance: there used to be a pine‐tree standing in our garden in her earlychildhood. Very likely it’s standing there still; so there’s no need tospeak in the past tense. Pine‐trees are not like people, AlexeyFyodorovitch, they don’t change quickly. ‘Mamma,’ she said, ‘I rememberthis pine‐tree as in a dream,’ only she said something so original aboutit that I can’t repeat it. Besides, I’ve forgotten it. Well, good‐by! I amso worried I feel I shall go out of my mind. Ah! Alexey Fyodorovitch, I’vebeen out of my mind twice in my life. Go to Lise, cheer her up, as youalways can so charmingly. Lise,” she cried, going to her door, “here I’vebrought you Alexey Fyodorovitch, whom you insulted so. He is not at allangry, I assure you; on the contrary, he is surprised that you couldsuppose so.”
“_Merci, maman._ Come in, Alexey Fyodorovitch.”
Alyosha went in. Lise looked rather embarrassed, and at once flushedcrimson. She was evidently ashamed of something, and, as people always doin such cases, she began immediately talking of other things, as thoughthey were of absorbing interest to her at the moment.
“Mamma has just told me all about the two hundred roubles, AlexeyFyodorovitch, and your taking them to that poor officer ... and she toldme all the awful story of how he had been insulted ... and you know,although mamma muddles things ... she always rushes from one thing toanother ... I cried when I heard. Well, did you give him the money and howis that poor man getting on?”
“The fact is I didn’t give it to him, and it’s a long story,” answeredAlyosha, as though he, too, could think of nothing but his regret athaving failed, yet Lise saw perfectly well that he, too, looked away, andthat he, too, was trying to talk of other things.
Alyosha sat down to the table and began to tell his story, but at thefirst words he lost his embarrassment and gained the whole of Lise’sattention as well. He spoke with deep feeling, under the influence of thestrong impression he had just received, and he succeeded in telling hisstory well and circumstantially. In old days in Moscow he had been fond ofcoming to Lise and describing to her what had just happened to him, whathe had read, or what he remembered of his childhood. Sometimes they hadmade day‐dreams and woven whole romances together—generally cheerful andamusing ones. Now they both felt suddenly transported to the old days inMoscow, two years before. Lise was extremely touched by his story. Alyoshadescribed Ilusha with warm feeling. When he finished describing how theluckless man trampled on the money, Lise could not help clasping her handsand crying out:
“So you didn’t give him the money! So you let him run away! Oh, dear, youought to have run after him!”
“No, Lise; it’s better I didn’t run after him,” said Alyosha, getting upfrom his chair and walking thoughtfully across the room.
“How so? How is it better? Now they are without food and their case ishopeless?”
“Not hopeless, for the two hundred roubles will still come to them. He’lltake the money to‐morrow. To‐morrow he will be sure to take it,” saidAlyosha, pacing up and down, pondering. “You see, Lise,” he went on,stopping suddenly before her, “I made one blunder, but that, even that, isall for the best.”
“What blunder, and why is it for the best?”
“I’ll tell you. He is a man of weak and timorous character; he hassuffered so much and is very good‐natured. I keep wondering why he tookoffense so suddenly, for I assure you, up to the last minute, he did notknow that he was going to trample on the notes. And I think now that therewas a great deal to offend him ... and it could not have been otherwise inhis position.... To begin with, he was sore at having been so glad of themoney in my presence and not having concealed it from me. If he had beenpleased, but not so much; if he had not shown it; if he had begunaffecting scruples and difficulties, as other people do when they takemoney, he might still endure to take it. But he was too genuinelydelighted, and that was mortifying. Ah, Lise, he is a good and truthfulman—that’s the worst of the whole business. All the while he talked, hisvoice was so weak, so broken, he talked so fast, so fast, he kept laughingsuch a laugh, or perhaps he was crying—yes, I am sure he was crying, hewas so delighted—and he talked about his daughters—and about the situationhe could get in another town.... And when he had poured out his heart, hefelt ashamed at having shown me his inmost soul like that. So he began tohate me at once. He is one of those awfully sensitive poor people. Whathad made him feel most ashamed was that he had given in too soon andaccepted me as a friend, you see. At first he almost flew at me and triedto intimidate me, but as soon as he saw the money he had begun embracingme; he kept touching me with his hands. This must have been how he came tofeel it all so humiliating, and then I made that blunder, a very importantone. I suddenly said to him that if he had not money enough to move toanother town, we would give it to him, and, indeed, I myself would givehim as much as he wanted out of my own money. That struck him all at once.Why, he thought, did I put myself forward to help him? You know, Lise,it’s awfully hard for a man who has been injured, when other people lookat him as though they were his benefactors.... I’ve heard that; FatherZossima told me so. I don’t know how to put it, but I have often seen itmyself. And I feel like that myself, too. And the worst of it was thatthough he did not know, up to the very last minute, that he would trampleon the notes, he had a kind of presentiment of it, I am sure of that.That’s just what made him so ecstatic, that he had that presentiment....And though it’s so dreadful, it’s all for the best. In fact, I believenothing better could have happened.”
“Why, why could nothing better have happened?” cried Lise, looking withgreat surprise at Alyosha.
“Because if he had taken the money, in an hour after getting home, hewould be crying with mortification, that’s just what would have happened.And most likely he would have come to me early to‐morrow, and perhaps haveflung the notes at me and trampled upon them as he did just now. But nowhe has gone home awfully proud and triumphant, though he knows he has‘ruined himself.’ So now nothing could be easier than to make him acceptthe two hundred roubles by to‐morrow, for he has already vindicated hishonor, tossed away the money, and trampled it under foot.... He couldn’tknow when he did it that I should bring it to him again to‐morrow, and yethe is in terrible need of that money. Though he is proud of himself now,yet even to‐day he’ll be thinking what a help he has lost. He will thinkof it more than ever at night, will dream of it, and by to‐morrow morninghe may be ready to run to me to ask forgiveness. It’s just then that I’llappear. ‘Here, you are a proud man,’ I shall say: ‘you have shown it; butnow take the money and forgive us!’ And then he will take it!”
Alyosha was carried away with joy as he uttered his last words, “And thenhe will take it!” Lise clapped her hands.
“Ah, that’s true! I understand that perfectly now. Ah, Alyosha, how do youknow all this? So young and yet he knows what’s in the heart.... I shouldnever have worked it out.”
“The great thing now is to persuade him that he is on an equal footingwith us, in spite of his taking money from us,” Alyosha went on in hisexcitement, “and not only on an equal, but even on a higher footing.”
“ ‘On a higher footing’ is charming, Alexey Fyodorovitch; but go on, goon!”
“You mean there isn’t such an expression as ‘on a higher footing’; butthat doesn’t matter because—”
“Oh, no, of course it doesn’t matter. Forgive me, Alyosha, dear.... Youknow, I scarcely respected you till now—that is I respected you but on anequal footing; but now I shall begin to respect you on a higher footing.Don’t be angry, dear, at my joking,” she put in at once, with strongfeeling. “I am absurd and small, but you, you! Listen, AlexeyFyodorovitch. Isn’t there in all our analysis—I mean your analysis ... no,better call it ours—aren’t we showing contempt for him, for that poorman—in analyzing his soul like this, as it were, from above, eh? Indeciding so certainly that he will take the money?”
“No, Lise, it’s not contempt,” Alyosha answered, as though he had preparedhimself for the question. “I was thinking of that on the way here. How canit be contempt when we are all like him, when we are all just the same ashe is? For you know we are just the same, no better. If we are better, weshould have been just the same in his place.... I don’t know about you,Lise, but I consider that I have a sordid soul in many ways, and his soulis not sordid; on the contrary, full of fine feeling.... No, Lise, I haveno contempt for him. Do you know, Lise, my elder told me once to care formost people exactly as one would for children, and for some of them as onewould for the sick in hospitals.”
“Ah, Alexey Fyodorovitch, dear, let us care for people as we would for thesick!”
“Let us, Lise; I am ready. Though I am not altogether ready in myself. Iam sometimes very impatient and at other times I don’t see things. It’sdifferent with you.”
“Ah, I don’t believe it! Alexey Fyodorovitch, how happy I am!”
“I am so glad you say so, Lise.”
“Alexey Fyodorovitch, you are wonderfully good, but you are sometimes sortof formal.... And yet you are not a bit formal really. Go to the door,open it gently, and see whether mamma is listening,” said Lise, in anervous, hurried whisper.
Alyosha went, opened the door, and reported that no one was listening.
“Come here, Alexey Fyodorovitch,” Lise went on, flushing redder andredder. “Give me your hand—that’s right. I have to make a greatconfession, I didn’t write to you yesterday in joke, but in earnest,” andshe hid her eyes with her hand. It was evident that she was greatlyashamed of the confession.
Suddenly she snatched his hand and impulsively kissed it three times.
“Ah, Lise, what a good thing!” cried Alyosha joyfully. “You know, I wasperfectly sure you were in earnest.”
“Sure? Upon my word!” She put aside his hand, but did not leave go of it,blushing hotly, and laughing a little happy laugh. “I kiss his hand and hesays, ‘What a good thing!’ ”
But her reproach was undeserved. Alyosha, too, was greatly overcome.
“I should like to please you always, Lise, but I don’t know how to do it,”he muttered, blushing too.
“Alyosha, dear, you are cold and rude. Do you see? He has chosen me as hiswife and is quite settled about it. He is sure I was in earnest. What athing to say! Why, that’s impertinence—that’s what it is.”
“Why, was it wrong of me to feel sure?” Alyosha asked, laughing suddenly.
“Ah, Alyosha, on the contrary, it was delightfully right,” cried Lise,looking tenderly and happily at him.
Alyosha stood still, holding her hand in his. Suddenly he stooped down andkissed her on her lips.
“Oh, what are you doing?” cried Lise. Alyosha was terribly abashed.
“Oh, forgive me if I shouldn’t.... Perhaps I’m awfully stupid.... You saidI was cold, so I kissed you.... But I see it was stupid.”
Lise laughed, and hid her face in her hands. “And in that dress!” sheejaculated in the midst of her mirth. But she suddenly ceased laughing andbecame serious, almost stern.
“Alyosha, we must put off kissing. We are not ready for that yet, and weshall have a long time to wait,” she ended suddenly. “Tell me rather whyyou who are so clever, so intellectual, so observant, choose a littleidiot, an invalid like me? Ah, Alyosha, I am awfully happy, for I don’tdeserve you a bit.”
“You do, Lise. I shall be leaving the monastery altogether in a few days.If I go into the world, I must marry. I know that. _He_ told me to marry,too. Whom could I marry better than you—and who would have me except you?I have been thinking it over. In the first place, you’ve known me from achild and you’ve a great many qualities I haven’t. You are more light‐hearted than I am; above all, you are more innocent than I am. I have beenbrought into contact with many, many things already.... Ah, you don’tknow, but I, too, am a Karamazov. What does it matter if you do laugh andmake jokes, and at me, too? Go on laughing. I am so glad you do. You laughlike a little child, but you think like a martyr.”
“Like a martyr? How?”
“Yes, Lise, your question just now: whether we weren’t showing contemptfor that poor man by dissecting his soul—that was the question of asufferer.... You see, I don’t know how to express it, but any one whothinks of such questions is capable of suffering. Sitting in your invalidchair you must have thought over many things already.”
“Alyosha, give me your hand. Why are you taking it away?” murmured Lise ina failing voice, weak with happiness. “Listen, Alyosha. What will you wearwhen you come out of the monastery? What sort of suit? Don’t laugh, don’tbe angry, it’s very, very important to me.”
“I haven’t thought about the suit, Lise; but I’ll wear whatever you like.”
“I should like you to have a dark blue velvet coat, a white piquéwaistcoat, and a soft gray felt hat.... Tell me, did you believe that Ididn’t care for you when I said I didn’t mean what I wrote?”
“No, I didn’t believe it.”
“Oh, you insupportable person, you are incorrigible.”
“You see, I knew that you—seemed to care for me, but I pretended tobelieve that you didn’t care for me to make it—easier for you.”
“That makes it worse! Worse and better than all! Alyosha, I am awfullyfond of you. Just before you came this morning, I tried my fortune. Idecided I would ask you for my letter, and if you brought it out calmlyand gave it to me (as might have been expected from you) it would meanthat you did not love me at all, that you felt nothing, and were simply astupid boy, good for nothing, and that I am ruined. But you left theletter at home and that cheered me. You left it behind on purpose, so asnot to give it back, because you knew I would ask for it? That was it,wasn’t it?”
“Ah, Lise, it was not so a bit. The letter is with me now, and it was thismorning, in this pocket. Here it is.”
Alyosha pulled the letter out laughing, and showed it her at a distance.
“But I am not going to give it to you. Look at it from here.”
“Why, then you told a lie? You, a monk, told a lie!”
“I told a lie if you like,” Alyosha laughed, too. “I told a lie so as notto give you back the letter. It’s very precious to me,” he added suddenly,with strong feeling, and again he flushed. “It always will be, and I won’tgive it up to any one!”
Lise looked at him joyfully. “Alyosha,” she murmured again, “look at thedoor. Isn’t mamma listening?”
“Very well, Lise, I’ll look; but wouldn’t it be better not to look? Whysuspect your mother of such meanness?”
“What meanness? As for her spying on her daughter, it’s her right, it’snot meanness!” cried Lise, firing up. “You may be sure, AlexeyFyodorovitch, that when I am a mother, if I have a daughter like myself Ishall certainly spy on her!”
“Really, Lise? That’s not right.”
“Oh, my goodness! What has meanness to do with it? If she were listeningto some ordinary worldly conversation, it would be meanness, but when herown daughter is shut up with a young man.... Listen, Alyosha, do you knowI shall spy upon you as soon as we are married, and let me tell you Ishall open all your letters and read them, so you may as well beprepared.”
“Yes, of course, if so—” muttered Alyosha, “only it’s not right.”
“Ah, how contemptuous! Alyosha, dear, we won’t quarrel the very first day.I’d better tell you the whole truth. Of course, it’s very wrong to spy onpeople, and, of course, I am not right and you are, only I shall spy onyou all the same.”
“Do, then; you won’t find out anything,” laughed Alyosha.
“And, Alyosha, will you give in to me? We must decide that too.”
“I shall be delighted to, Lise, and certain to, only not in the mostimportant things. Even if you don’t agree with me, I shall do my duty inthe most important things.”
“That’s right; but let me tell you I am ready to give in to you not onlyin the most important matters, but in everything. And I am ready to vow todo so now—in everything, and for all my life!” cried Lise fervently, “andI’ll do it gladly, gladly! What’s more, I’ll swear never to spy on you,never once, never to read one of your letters. For you are right and I amnot. And though I shall be awfully tempted to spy, I know that I won’t doit since you consider it dishonorable. You are my conscience now....Listen, Alexey Fyodorovitch, why have you been so sad lately—bothyesterday and to‐day? I know you have a lot of anxiety and trouble, but Isee you have some special grief besides, some secret one, perhaps?”
“Yes, Lise, I have a secret one, too,” answered Alyosha mournfully. “I seeyou love me, since you guessed that.”
“What grief? What about? Can you tell me?” asked Lise with timid entreaty.
“I’ll tell you later, Lise—afterwards,” said Alyosha, confused. “Now youwouldn’t understand it perhaps—and perhaps I couldn’t explain it.”
“I know your brothers and your father are worrying you, too.”
“Yes, my brothers too,” murmured Alyosha, pondering.
“I don’t like your brother Ivan, Alyosha,” said Lise suddenly.
He noticed this remark with some surprise, but did not answer it.
“My brothers are destroying themselves,” he went on, “my father, too. Andthey are destroying others with them. It’s ‘the primitive force of theKaramazovs,’ as Father Païssy said the other day, a crude, unbridled,earthly force. Does the spirit of God move above that force? Even that Idon’t know. I only know that I, too, am a Karamazov.... Me a monk, a monk!Am I a monk, Lise? You said just now that I was.”
“Yes, I did.”
“And perhaps I don’t even believe in God.”
“You don’t believe? What is the matter?” said Lise quietly and gently. ButAlyosha did not answer. There was something too mysterious, too subjectivein these last words of his, perhaps obscure to himself, but yet torturinghim.
“And now on the top of it all, my friend, the best man in the world, isgoing, is leaving the earth! If you knew, Lise, how bound up in soul I amwith him! And then I shall be left alone.... I shall come to you, Lise....For the future we will be together.”
“Yes, together, together! Henceforward we shall be always together, allour lives! Listen, kiss me, I allow you.”
Alyosha kissed her.
“Come, now go. Christ be with you!” and she made the sign of the crossover him. “Make haste back to _him_ while he is alive. I see I’ve kept youcruelly. I’ll pray to‐day for him and you. Alyosha, we shall be happy!Shall we be happy, shall we?”
“I believe we shall, Lise.”
Alyosha thought it better not to go in to Madame Hohlakov and was goingout of the house without saying good‐by to her. But no sooner had heopened the door than he found Madame Hohlakov standing before him. Fromthe first word Alyosha guessed that she had been waiting on purpose tomeet him.
“Alexey Fyodorovitch, this is awful. This is all childish nonsense andridiculous. I trust you won’t dream—It’s foolishness, nothing butfoolishness!” she said, attacking him at once.
“Only don’t tell her that,” said Alyosha, “or she will be upset, andthat’s bad for her now.”
“Sensible advice from a sensible young man. Am I to understand that youonly agreed with her from compassion for her invalid state, because youdidn’t want to irritate her by contradiction?”
“Oh, no, not at all. I was quite serious in what I said,” Alyosha declaredstoutly.
“To be serious about it is impossible, unthinkable, and in the first placeI shall never be at home to you again, and I shall take her away, you maybe sure of that.”
“But why?” asked Alyosha. “It’s all so far off. We may have to waitanother year and a half.”
“Ah, Alexey Fyodorovitch, that’s true, of course, and you’ll have time toquarrel and separate a thousand times in a year and a half. But I am sounhappy! Though it’s such nonsense, it’s a great blow to me. I feel likeFamusov in the last scene of _Sorrow from Wit_. You are Tchatsky and sheis Sofya, and, only fancy, I’ve run down to meet you on the stairs, and inthe play the fatal scene takes place on the staircase. I heard it all; Ialmost dropped. So this is the explanation of her dreadful night and herhysterics of late! It means love to the daughter but death to the mother.I might as well be in my grave at once. And a more serious matter still,what is this letter she has written? Show it me at once, at once!”
“No, there’s no need. Tell me, how is Katerina Ivanovna now? I must know.”
“She still lies in delirium; she has not regained consciousness. Her auntsare here; but they do nothing but sigh and give themselves airs.Herzenstube came, and he was so alarmed that I didn’t know what to do forhim. I nearly sent for a doctor to look after him. He was driven home inmy carriage. And on the top of it all, you and this letter! It’s truenothing can happen for a year and a half. In the name of all that’s holy,in the name of your dying elder, show me that letter, Alexey Fyodorovitch.I’m her mother. Hold it in your hand, if you like, and I will read it so.”
“No, I won’t show it to you. Even if she sanctioned it, I wouldn’t. I amcoming to‐morrow, and if you like, we can talk over many things, but nowgood‐by!”
And Alyosha ran downstairs and into the street.


Chapter II. Smerdyakov With A Guitar

He had no time to lose indeed. Even while he was saying good‐by to Lise,the thought had struck him that he must attempt some stratagem to find hisbrother Dmitri, who was evidently keeping out of his way. It was gettinglate, nearly three o’clock. Alyosha’s whole soul turned to the monastery,to his dying saint, but the necessity of seeing Dmitri outweighedeverything. The conviction that a great inevitable catastrophe was aboutto happen grew stronger in Alyosha’s mind with every hour. What thatcatastrophe was, and what he would say at that moment to his brother, hecould perhaps not have said definitely. “Even if my benefactor must diewithout me, anyway I won’t have to reproach myself all my life with thethought that I might have saved something and did not, but passed by andhastened home. If I do as I intend, I shall be following his greatprecept.”
His plan was to catch his brother Dmitri unawares, to climb over thefence, as he had the day before, get into the garden and sit in thesummer‐house. If Dmitri were not there, thought Alyosha, he would notannounce himself to Foma or the women of the house, but would remainhidden in the summer‐house, even if he had to wait there till evening. If,as before, Dmitri were lying in wait for Grushenka to come, he would bevery likely to come to the summer‐house. Alyosha did not, however, givemuch thought to the details of his plan, but resolved to act upon it, evenif it meant not getting back to the monastery that day.
Everything happened without hindrance, he climbed over the hurdle almostin the same spot as the day before, and stole into the summer‐houseunseen. He did not want to be noticed. The woman of the house and Fomatoo, if he were here, might be loyal to his brother and obey hisinstructions, and so refuse to let Alyosha come into the garden, or mightwarn Dmitri that he was being sought and inquired for.
There was no one in the summer‐house. Alyosha sat down and began to wait.He looked round the summer‐house, which somehow struck him as a great dealmore ancient than before. Though the day was just as fine as yesterday, itseemed a wretched little place this time. There was a circle on the table,left no doubt from the glass of brandy having been spilt the day before.Foolish and irrelevant ideas strayed about his mind, as they always do ina time of tedious waiting. He wondered, for instance, why he had sat downprecisely in the same place as before, why not in the other seat. At lasthe felt very depressed—depressed by suspense and uncertainty. But he hadnot sat there more than a quarter of an hour, when he suddenly heard thethrum of a guitar somewhere quite close. People were sitting, or had onlyjust sat down, somewhere in the bushes not more than twenty paces away.Alyosha suddenly recollected that on coming out of the summer‐house theday before, he had caught a glimpse of an old green low garden‐seat amongthe bushes on the left, by the fence. The people must be sitting on itnow. Who were they?
A man’s voice suddenly began singing in a sugary falsetto, accompanyinghimself on the guitar:

    With invincible force    I am bound to my dear.    O Lord, have mercy    On her and on me!    On her and on me!    On her and on me!

The voice ceased. It was a lackey’s tenor and a lackey’s song. Anothervoice, a woman’s, suddenly asked insinuatingly and bashfully, though withmincing affectation:
“Why haven’t you been to see us for so long, Pavel Fyodorovitch? Why doyou always look down upon us?”
“Not at all,” answered a man’s voice politely, but with emphatic dignity.It was clear that the man had the best of the position, and that the womanwas making advances. “I believe the man must be Smerdyakov,” thoughtAlyosha, “from his voice. And the lady must be the daughter of the househere, who has come from Moscow, the one who wears the dress with a tailand goes to Marfa for soup.”
“I am awfully fond of verses of all kinds, if they rhyme,” the woman’svoice continued. “Why don’t you go on?”
The man sang again:

    What do I care for royal wealth    If but my dear one be in health?    Lord have mercy    On her and on me!    On her and on me!    On her and on me!

“It was even better last time,” observed the woman’s voice. “You sang ‘Ifmy darling be in health’; it sounded more tender. I suppose you’veforgotten to‐day.”
“Poetry is rubbish!” said Smerdyakov curtly.
“Oh, no! I am very fond of poetry.”
“So far as it’s poetry, it’s essential rubbish. Consider yourself, whoever talks in rhyme? And if we were all to talk in rhyme, even though itwere decreed by government, we shouldn’t say much, should we? Poetry is nogood, Marya Kondratyevna.”
“How clever you are! How is it you’ve gone so deep into everything?” Thewoman’s voice was more and more insinuating.
“I could have done better than that. I could have known more than that, ifit had not been for my destiny from my childhood up. I would have shot aman in a duel if he called me names because I am descended from a filthybeggar and have no father. And they used to throw it in my teeth inMoscow. It had reached them from here, thanks to Grigory Vassilyevitch.Grigory Vassilyevitch blames me for rebelling against my birth, but Iwould have sanctioned their killing me before I was born that I might nothave come into the world at all. They used to say in the market, and yourmamma too, with great lack of delicacy, set off telling me that her hairwas like a mat on her head, and that she was short of five foot by a weebit. Why talk of a wee bit while she might have said ‘a little bit,’ likeevery one else? She wanted to make it touching, a regular peasant’sfeeling. Can a Russian peasant be said to feel, in comparison with aneducated man? He can’t be said to have feeling at all, in his ignorance.From my childhood up when I hear ‘a wee bit,’ I am ready to burst withrage. I hate all Russia, Marya Kondratyevna.”
“If you’d been a cadet in the army, or a young hussar, you wouldn’t havetalked like that, but would have drawn your saber to defend all Russia.”
“I don’t want to be a hussar, Marya Kondratyevna, and, what’s more, Ishould like to abolish all soldiers.”
“And when an enemy comes, who is going to defend us?”
“There’s no need of defense. In 1812 there was a great invasion of Russiaby Napoleon, first Emperor of the French, father of the present one, andit would have been a good thing if they had conquered us. A clever nationwould have conquered a very stupid one and annexed it. We should have hadquite different institutions.”
“Are they so much better in their own country than we are? I wouldn’tchange a dandy I know of for three young Englishmen,” observed MaryaKondratyevna tenderly, doubtless accompanying her words with a mostlanguishing glance.
“That’s as one prefers.”
“But you are just like a foreigner—just like a most gentlemanly foreigner.I tell you that, though it makes me bashful.”
“If you care to know, the folks there and ours here are just alike intheir vice. They are swindlers, only there the scoundrel wears polishedboots and here he grovels in filth and sees no harm in it. The Russianpeople want thrashing, as Fyodor Pavlovitch said very truly yesterday,though he is mad, and all his children.”
“You said yourself you had such a respect for Ivan Fyodorovitch.”
“But he said I was a stinking lackey. He thinks that I might be unruly. Heis mistaken there. If I had a certain sum in my pocket, I would have lefthere long ago. Dmitri Fyodorovitch is lower than any lackey in hisbehavior, in his mind, and in his poverty. He doesn’t know how to doanything, and yet he is respected by every one. I may be only a soup‐maker, but with luck I could open a café restaurant in Petrovka, inMoscow, for my cookery is something special, and there’s no one in Moscow,except the foreigners, whose cookery is anything special. DmitriFyodorovitch is a beggar, but if he were to challenge the son of the firstcount in the country, he’d fight him. Though in what way is he better thanI am? For he is ever so much stupider than I am. Look at the money he haswasted without any need!”
“It must be lovely, a duel,” Marya Kondratyevna observed suddenly.
“How so?”
“It must be so dreadful and so brave, especially when young officers withpistols in their hands pop at one another for the sake of some lady. Aperfect picture! Ah, if only girls were allowed to look on, I’d giveanything to see one!”
“It’s all very well when you are firing at some one, but when he is firingstraight in your mug, you must feel pretty silly. You’d be glad to runaway, Marya Kondratyevna.”
“You don’t mean you would run away?” But Smerdyakov did not deign toreply. After a moment’s silence the guitar tinkled again, and he sangagain in the same falsetto:

    Whatever you may say,    I shall go far away.    Life will be bright and gay    In the city far away.    I shall not grieve,    I shall not grieve at all,    I don’t intend to grieve at all.

Then something unexpected happened. Alyosha suddenly sneezed. They weresilent. Alyosha got up and walked towards them. He found Smerdyakovdressed up and wearing polished boots, his hair pomaded, and perhapscurled. The guitar lay on the garden‐seat. His companion was the daughterof the house, wearing a light‐blue dress with a train two yards long. Shewas young and would not have been bad‐looking, but that her face was soround and terribly freckled.
“Will my brother Dmitri soon be back?” asked Alyosha with as muchcomposure as he could.
Smerdyakov got up slowly; Marya Kondratyevna rose too.
“How am I to know about Dmitri Fyodorovitch? It’s not as if I were hiskeeper,” answered Smerdyakov quietly, distinctly, and superciliously.
“But I simply asked whether you do know?” Alyosha explained.
“I know nothing of his whereabouts and don’t want to.”
“But my brother told me that you let him know all that goes on in thehouse, and promised to let him know when Agrafena Alexandrovna comes.”
Smerdyakov turned a deliberate, unmoved glance upon him.
“And how did you get in this time, since the gate was bolted an hour ago?”he asked, looking at Alyosha.
“I came in from the back‐alley, over the fence, and went straight to thesummer‐house. I hope you’ll forgive me,” he added, addressing MaryaKondratyevna. “I was in a hurry to find my brother.”
“Ach, as though we could take it amiss in you!” drawled MaryaKondratyevna, flattered by Alyosha’s apology. “For Dmitri Fyodorovitchoften goes to the summer‐house in that way. We don’t know he is here andhe is sitting in the summer‐house.”
“I am very anxious to find him, or to learn from you where he is now.Believe me, it’s on business of great importance to him.”
“He never tells us,” lisped Marya Kondratyevna.
“Though I used to come here as a friend,” Smerdyakov began again, “DmitriFyodorovitch has pestered me in a merciless way even here by his incessantquestions about the master. ‘What news?’ he’ll ask. ‘What’s going on inthere now? Who’s coming and going?’ and can’t I tell him something more.Twice already he’s threatened me with death.”
“With death?” Alyosha exclaimed in surprise.
“Do you suppose he’d think much of that, with his temper, which you had achance of observing yourself yesterday? He says if I let AgrafenaAlexandrovna in and she passes the night there, I’ll be the first tosuffer for it. I am terribly afraid of him, and if I were not even moreafraid of doing so, I ought to let the police know. God only knows what hemight not do!”
“His honor said to him the other day, ‘I’ll pound you in a mortar!’ ”added Marya Kondratyevna.
“Oh, if it’s pounding in a mortar, it may be only talk,” observed Alyosha.“If I could meet him, I might speak to him about that too.”
“Well, the only thing I can tell you is this,” said Smerdyakov, as thoughthinking better of it; “I am here as an old friend and neighbor, and itwould be odd if I didn’t come. On the other hand, Ivan Fyodorovitch sentme first thing this morning to your brother’s lodging in Lake Street,without a letter, but with a message to Dmitri Fyodorovitch to go to dinewith him at the restaurant here, in the market‐place. I went, but didn’tfind Dmitri Fyodorovitch at home, though it was eight o’clock. ‘He’s beenhere, but he is quite gone,’ those were the very words of his landlady.It’s as though there was an understanding between them. Perhaps at thismoment he is in the restaurant with Ivan Fyodorovitch, for IvanFyodorovitch has not been home to dinner and Fyodor Pavlovitch dined alonean hour ago, and is gone to lie down. But I beg you most particularly notto speak of me and of what I have told you, for he’d kill me for nothingat all.”
“Brother Ivan invited Dmitri to the restaurant to‐day?” repeated Alyoshaquickly.
“That’s so.”
“The Metropolis tavern in the market‐place?”
“The very same.”
“That’s quite likely,” cried Alyosha, much excited. “Thank you,Smerdyakov; that’s important. I’ll go there at once.”
“Don’t betray me,” Smerdyakov called after him.
“Oh, no, I’ll go to the tavern as though by chance. Don’t be anxious.”
“But wait a minute, I’ll open the gate to you,” cried Marya Kondratyevna.
“No; it’s a short cut, I’ll get over the fence again.”
What he had heard threw Alyosha into great agitation. He ran to thetavern. It was impossible for him to go into the tavern in his monasticdress, but he could inquire at the entrance for his brothers and call themdown. But just as he reached the tavern, a window was flung open, and hisbrother Ivan called down to him from it.
“Alyosha, can’t you come up here to me? I shall be awfully grateful.”
“To be sure I can, only I don’t quite know whether in this dress—”
“But I am in a room apart. Come up the steps; I’ll run down to meet you.”
A minute later Alyosha was sitting beside his brother. Ivan was alonedining.


Chapter III. The Brothers Make Friends

Ivan was not, however, in a separate room, but only in a place shut off bya screen, so that it was unseen by other people in the room. It was thefirst room from the entrance with a buffet along the wall. Waiters werecontinually darting to and fro in it. The only customer in the room was anold retired military man drinking tea in a corner. But there was the usualbustle going on in the other rooms of the tavern; there were shouts forthe waiters, the sound of popping corks, the click of billiard balls, thedrone of the organ. Alyosha knew that Ivan did not usually visit thistavern and disliked taverns in general. So he must have come here, hereflected, simply to meet Dmitri by arrangement. Yet Dmitri was not there.
“Shall I order you fish, soup or anything. You don’t live on tea alone, Isuppose,” cried Ivan, apparently delighted at having got hold of Alyosha.He had finished dinner and was drinking tea.
“Let me have soup, and tea afterwards, I am hungry,” said Alyosha gayly.
“And cherry jam? They have it here. You remember how you used to lovecherry jam when you were little?”
“You remember that? Let me have jam too, I like it still.”
Ivan rang for the waiter and ordered soup, jam and tea.
“I remember everything, Alyosha, I remember you till you were eleven, Iwas nearly fifteen. There’s such a difference between fifteen and eleventhat brothers are never companions at those ages. I don’t know whether Iwas fond of you even. When I went away to Moscow for the first few years Inever thought of you at all. Then, when you came to Moscow yourself, weonly met once somewhere, I believe. And now I’ve been here more than threemonths, and so far we have scarcely said a word to each other. To‐morrow Iam going away, and I was just thinking as I sat here how I could see youto say good‐by and just then you passed.”
“Were you very anxious to see me, then?”
“Very. I want to get to know you once for all, and I want you to know me.And then to say good‐by. I believe it’s always best to get to know peoplejust before leaving them. I’ve noticed how you’ve been looking at me thesethree months. There has been a continual look of expectation in your eyes,and I can’t endure that. That’s how it is I’ve kept away from you. But inthe end I have learned to respect you. The little man stands firm, Ithought. Though I am laughing, I am serious. You do stand firm, don’t you?I like people who are firm like that whatever it is they stand by, even ifthey are such little fellows as you. Your expectant eyes ceased to annoyme, I grew fond of them in the end, those expectant eyes. You seem to loveme for some reason, Alyosha?”
“I do love you, Ivan. Dmitri says of you—Ivan is a tomb! I say of you,Ivan is a riddle. You are a riddle to me even now. But I understandsomething in you, and I did not understand it till this morning.”
“What’s that?” laughed Ivan.
“You won’t be angry?” Alyosha laughed too.
“Well?”
“That you are just as young as other young men of three and twenty, thatyou are just a young and fresh and nice boy, green in fact! Now, have Iinsulted you dreadfully?”
“On the contrary, I am struck by a coincidence,” cried Ivan, warmly andgood‐humoredly. “Would you believe it that ever since that scene with her,I have thought of nothing else but my youthful greenness, and just asthough you guessed that, you begin about it. Do you know I’ve been sittinghere thinking to myself: that if I didn’t believe in life, if I lost faithin the woman I love, lost faith in the order of things, were convinced infact that everything is a disorderly, damnable, and perhaps devil‐riddenchaos, if I were struck by every horror of man’s disillusionment—still Ishould want to live and, having once tasted of the cup, I would not turnaway from it till I had drained it! At thirty, though, I shall be sure toleave the cup, even if I’ve not emptied it, and turn away—where I don’tknow. But till I am thirty, I know that my youth will triumph overeverything—every disillusionment, every disgust with life. I’ve askedmyself many times whether there is in the world any despair that wouldovercome this frantic and perhaps unseemly thirst for life in me, and I’vecome to the conclusion that there isn’t, that is till I am thirty, andthen I shall lose it of myself, I fancy. Some driveling consumptivemoralists—and poets especially—often call that thirst for life base. It’sa feature of the Karamazovs, it’s true, that thirst for life regardless ofeverything; you have it no doubt too, but why is it base? The centripetalforce on our planet is still fearfully strong, Alyosha. I have a longingfor life, and I go on living in spite of logic. Though I may not believein the order of the universe, yet I love the sticky little leaves as theyopen in spring. I love the blue sky, I love some people, whom one lovesyou know sometimes without knowing why. I love some great deeds done bymen, though I’ve long ceased perhaps to have faith in them, yet from oldhabit one’s heart prizes them. Here they have brought the soup for you,eat it, it will do you good. It’s first‐rate soup, they know how to makeit here. I want to travel in Europe, Alyosha, I shall set off from here.And yet I know that I am only going to a graveyard, but it’s a mostprecious graveyard, that’s what it is! Precious are the dead that liethere, every stone over them speaks of such burning life in the past, ofsuch passionate faith in their work, their truth, their struggle and theirscience, that I know I shall fall on the ground and kiss those stones andweep over them; though I’m convinced in my heart that it’s long beennothing but a graveyard. And I shall not weep from despair, but simplybecause I shall be happy in my tears, I shall steep my soul in my emotion.I love the sticky leaves in spring, the blue sky—that’s all it is. It’snot a matter of intellect or logic, it’s loving with one’s inside, withone’s stomach. One loves the first strength of one’s youth. Do youunderstand anything of my tirade, Alyosha?” Ivan laughed suddenly.
“I understand too well, Ivan. One longs to love with one’s inside, withone’s stomach. You said that so well and I am awfully glad that you havesuch a longing for life,” cried Alyosha. “I think every one should lovelife above everything in the world.”
“Love life more than the meaning of it?”
“Certainly, love it, regardless of logic as you say, it must be regardlessof logic, and it’s only then one will understand the meaning of it. I havethought so a long time. Half your work is done, Ivan, you love life, nowyou’ve only to try to do the second half and you are saved.”
“You are trying to save me, but perhaps I am not lost! And what does yoursecond half mean?”
“Why, one has to raise up your dead, who perhaps have not died after all.Come, let me have tea. I am so glad of our talk, Ivan.”
“I see you are feeling inspired. I am awfully fond of such _professions defoi_ from such—novices. You are a steadfast person, Alexey. Is it truethat you mean to leave the monastery?”
“Yes, my elder sends me out into the world.”
“We shall see each other then in the world. We shall meet before I amthirty, when I shall begin to turn aside from the cup. Father doesn’t wantto turn aside from his cup till he is seventy, he dreams of hanging on toeighty in fact, so he says. He means it only too seriously, though he is abuffoon. He stands on a firm rock, too, he stands on his sensuality—thoughafter we are thirty, indeed, there may be nothing else to stand on.... Butto hang on to seventy is nasty, better only to thirty; one might retain ‘ashadow of nobility’ by deceiving oneself. Have you seen Dmitri to‐day?”
“No, but I saw Smerdyakov,” and Alyosha rapidly, though minutely,described his meeting with Smerdyakov. Ivan began listening anxiously andquestioned him.
“But he begged me not to tell Dmitri that he had told me about him,” addedAlyosha. Ivan frowned and pondered.
“Are you frowning on Smerdyakov’s account?” asked Alyosha.
“Yes, on his account. Damn him, I certainly did want to see Dmitri, butnow there’s no need,” said Ivan reluctantly.
“But are you really going so soon, brother?”
“Yes.”
“What of Dmitri and father? how will it end?” asked Alyosha anxiously.
“You are always harping upon it! What have I to do with it? Am I mybrother Dmitri’s keeper?” Ivan snapped irritably, but then he suddenlysmiled bitterly. “Cain’s answer about his murdered brother, wasn’t it?Perhaps that’s what you’re thinking at this moment? Well, damn it all, Ican’t stay here to be their keeper, can I? I’ve finished what I had to do,and I am going. Do you imagine I am jealous of Dmitri, that I’ve beentrying to steal his beautiful Katerina Ivanovna for the last three months?Nonsense, I had business of my own. I finished it. I am going. I finishedit just now, you were witness.”
“At Katerina Ivanovna’s?”
“Yes, and I’ve released myself once for all. And after all, what have I todo with Dmitri? Dmitri doesn’t come in. I had my own business to settlewith Katerina Ivanovna. You know, on the contrary, that Dmitri behaved asthough there was an understanding between us. I didn’t ask him to do it,but he solemnly handed her over to me and gave us his blessing. It’s alltoo funny. Ah, Alyosha, if you only knew how light my heart is now! Wouldyou believe, it, I sat here eating my dinner and was nearly orderingchampagne to celebrate my first hour of freedom. Tfoo! It’s been going onnearly six months, and all at once I’ve thrown it off. I could never haveguessed even yesterday, how easy it would be to put an end to it if Iwanted.”
“You are speaking of your love, Ivan?”
“Of my love, if you like. I fell in love with the young lady, I worriedmyself over her and she worried me. I sat watching over her ... and all atonce it’s collapsed! I spoke this morning with inspiration, but I wentaway and roared with laughter. Would you believe it? Yes, it’s the literaltruth.”
“You seem very merry about it now,” observed Alyosha, looking into hisface, which had suddenly grown brighter.
“But how could I tell that I didn’t care for her a bit! Ha ha! It appearsafter all I didn’t. And yet how she attracted me! How attractive she wasjust now when I made my speech! And do you know she attracts me awfullyeven now, yet how easy it is to leave her. Do you think I am boasting?”
“No, only perhaps it wasn’t love.”
“Alyosha,” laughed Ivan, “don’t make reflections about love, it’s unseemlyfor you. How you rushed into the discussion this morning! I’ve forgottento kiss you for it.... But how she tormented me! It certainly was sittingby a ‘laceration.’ Ah, she knew how I loved her! She loved me and notDmitri,” Ivan insisted gayly. “Her feeling for Dmitri was simply a self‐laceration. All I told her just now was perfectly true, but the worst ofit is, it may take her fifteen or twenty years to find out that shedoesn’t care for Dmitri, and loves me whom she torments, and perhaps shemay never find it out at all, in spite of her lesson to‐day. Well, it’sbetter so; I can simply go away for good. By the way, how is she now? Whathappened after I departed?”
Alyosha told him she had been hysterical, and that she was now, he heard,unconscious and delirious.
“Isn’t Madame Hohlakov laying it on?”
“I think not.”
“I must find out. Nobody dies of hysterics, though. They don’t matter. Godgave woman hysterics as a relief. I won’t go to her at all. Why pushmyself forward again?”
“But you told her that she had never cared for you.”
“I did that on purpose. Alyosha, shall I call for some champagne? Let usdrink to my freedom. Ah, if only you knew how glad I am!”
“No, brother, we had better not drink,” said Alyosha suddenly. “Besides Ifeel somehow depressed.”
“Yes, you’ve been depressed a long time, I’ve noticed it.”
“Have you settled to go to‐morrow morning, then?”
“Morning? I didn’t say I should go in the morning.... But perhaps it maybe the morning. Would you believe it, I dined here to‐day only to avoiddining with the old man, I loathe him so. I should have left long ago, sofar as he is concerned. But why are you so worried about my going away?We’ve plenty of time before I go, an eternity!”
“If you are going away to‐morrow, what do you mean by an eternity?”
“But what does it matter to us?” laughed Ivan. “We’ve time enough for ourtalk, for what brought us here. Why do you look so surprised? Answer: whyhave we met here? To talk of my love for Katerina Ivanovna, of the old manand Dmitri? of foreign travel? of the fatal position of Russia? Of theEmperor Napoleon? Is that it?”
“No.”
“Then you know what for. It’s different for other people; but we in ourgreen youth have to settle the eternal questions first of all. That’s whatwe care about. Young Russia is talking about nothing but the eternalquestions now. Just when the old folks are all taken up with practicalquestions. Why have you been looking at me in expectation for the lastthree months? To ask me, ‘What do you believe, or don’t you believe atall?’ That’s what your eyes have been meaning for these three months,haven’t they?”
“Perhaps so,” smiled Alyosha. “You are not laughing at me, now, Ivan?”
“Me laughing! I don’t want to wound my little brother who has beenwatching me with such expectation for three months. Alyosha, look straightat me! Of course I am just such a little boy as you are, only not anovice. And what have Russian boys been doing up till now, some of them, Imean? In this stinking tavern, for instance, here, they meet and sit downin a corner. They’ve never met in their lives before and, when they go outof the tavern, they won’t meet again for forty years. And what do theytalk about in that momentary halt in the tavern? Of the eternal questions,of the existence of God and immortality. And those who do not believe inGod talk of socialism or anarchism, of the transformation of all humanityon a new pattern, so that it all comes to the same, they’re the samequestions turned inside out. And masses, masses of the most originalRussian boys do nothing but talk of the eternal questions! Isn’t it so?”
“Yes, for real Russians the questions of God’s existence and ofimmortality, or, as you say, the same questions turned inside out, comefirst and foremost, of course, and so they should,” said Alyosha, stillwatching his brother with the same gentle and inquiring smile.
“Well, Alyosha, it’s sometimes very unwise to be a Russian at all, butanything stupider than the way Russian boys spend their time one canhardly imagine. But there’s one Russian boy called Alyosha I am awfullyfond of.”
“How nicely you put that in!” Alyosha laughed suddenly.
“Well, tell me where to begin, give your orders. The existence of God,eh?”
“Begin where you like. You declared yesterday at father’s that there wasno God.” Alyosha looked searchingly at his brother.
“I said that yesterday at dinner on purpose to tease you and I saw youreyes glow. But now I’ve no objection to discussing with you, and I say sovery seriously. I want to be friends with you, Alyosha, for I have nofriends and want to try it. Well, only fancy, perhaps I too accept God,”laughed Ivan; “that’s a surprise for you, isn’t it?”
“Yes, of course, if you are not joking now.”
“Joking? I was told at the elder’s yesterday that I was joking. You know,dear boy, there was an old sinner in the eighteenth century who declaredthat, if there were no God, he would have to be invented. _S’il n’existaitpas Dieu, il faudrait l’inventer._ And man has actually invented God. Andwhat’s strange, what would be marvelous, is not that God should reallyexist; the marvel is that such an idea, the idea of the necessity of God,could enter the head of such a savage, vicious beast as man. So holy itis, so touching, so wise and so great a credit it does to man. As for me,I’ve long resolved not to think whether man created God or God man. And Iwon’t go through all the axioms laid down by Russian boys on that subject,all derived from European hypotheses; for what’s a hypothesis there, is anaxiom with the Russian boy, and not only with the boys but with theirteachers too, for our Russian professors are often just the same boysthemselves. And so I omit all the hypotheses. For what are we aiming atnow? I am trying to explain as quickly as possible my essential nature,that is what manner of man I am, what I believe in, and for what I hope,that’s it, isn’t it? And therefore I tell you that I accept God simply.But you must note this: if God exists and if He really did create theworld, then, as we all know, He created it according to the geometry ofEuclid and the human mind with the conception of only three dimensions inspace. Yet there have been and still are geometricians and philosophers,and even some of the most distinguished, who doubt whether the wholeuniverse, or to speak more widely the whole of being, was only created inEuclid’s geometry; they even dare to dream that two parallel lines, whichaccording to Euclid can never meet on earth, may meet somewhere ininfinity. I have come to the conclusion that, since I can’t understandeven that, I can’t expect to understand about God. I acknowledge humblythat I have no faculty for settling such questions, I have a Euclidianearthly mind, and how could I solve problems that are not of this world?And I advise you never to think about it either, my dear Alyosha,especially about God, whether He exists or not. All such questions areutterly inappropriate for a mind created with an idea of only threedimensions. And so I accept God and am glad to, and what’s more, I acceptHis wisdom, His purpose—which are utterly beyond our ken; I believe in theunderlying order and the meaning of life; I believe in the eternal harmonyin which they say we shall one day be blended. I believe in the Word toWhich the universe is striving, and Which Itself was ‘with God,’ and WhichItself is God and so on, and so on, to infinity. There are all sorts ofphrases for it. I seem to be on the right path, don’t I? Yet would youbelieve it, in the final result I don’t accept this world of God’s, and,although I know it exists, I don’t accept it at all. It’s not that I don’taccept God, you must understand, it’s the world created by Him I don’t andcannot accept. Let me make it plain. I believe like a child that sufferingwill be healed and made up for, that all the humiliating absurdity ofhuman contradictions will vanish like a pitiful mirage, like thedespicable fabrication of the impotent and infinitely small Euclidian mindof man, that in the world’s finale, at the moment of eternal harmony,something so precious will come to pass that it will suffice for allhearts, for the comforting of all resentments, for the atonement of allthe crimes of humanity, of all the blood they’ve shed; that it will makeit not only possible to forgive but to justify all that has happened withmen—but though all that may come to pass, I don’t accept it. I won’taccept it. Even if parallel lines do meet and I see it myself, I shall seeit and say that they’ve met, but still I won’t accept it. That’s what’s atthe root of me, Alyosha; that’s my creed. I am in earnest in what I say. Ibegan our talk as stupidly as I could on purpose, but I’ve led up to myconfession, for that’s all you want. You didn’t want to hear about God,but only to know what the brother you love lives by. And so I’ve toldyou.”
Ivan concluded his long tirade with marked and unexpected feeling.
“And why did you begin ‘as stupidly as you could’?” asked Alyosha, lookingdreamily at him.
“To begin with, for the sake of being Russian. Russian conversations onsuch subjects are always carried on inconceivably stupidly. And secondly,the stupider one is, the closer one is to reality. The stupider one is,the clearer one is. Stupidity is brief and artless, while intelligencewriggles and hides itself. Intelligence is a knave, but stupidity ishonest and straightforward. I’ve led the conversation to my despair, andthe more stupidly I have presented it, the better for me.”
“You will explain why you don’t accept the world?” said Alyosha.
“To be sure I will, it’s not a secret, that’s what I’ve been leading upto. Dear little brother, I don’t want to corrupt you or to turn you fromyour stronghold, perhaps I want to be healed by you.” Ivan smiled suddenlyquite like a little gentle child. Alyosha had never seen such a smile onhis face before.


Chapter IV. Rebellion

“I must make you one confession,” Ivan began. “I could never understandhow one can love one’s neighbors. It’s just one’s neighbors, to my mind,that one can’t love, though one might love those at a distance. I onceread somewhere of John the Merciful, a saint, that when a hungry, frozenbeggar came to him, he took him into his bed, held him in his arms, andbegan breathing into his mouth, which was putrid and loathsome from someawful disease. I am convinced that he did that from ‘self‐laceration,’from the self‐laceration of falsity, for the sake of the charity imposedby duty, as a penance laid on him. For any one to love a man, he must behidden, for as soon as he shows his face, love is gone.”
“Father Zossima has talked of that more than once,” observed Alyosha; “he,too, said that the face of a man often hinders many people not practicedin love, from loving him. But yet there’s a great deal of love in mankind,and almost Christ‐like love. I know that myself, Ivan.”
“Well, I know nothing of it so far, and can’t understand it, and theinnumerable mass of mankind are with me there. The question is, whetherthat’s due to men’s bad qualities or whether it’s inherent in theirnature. To my thinking, Christ‐like love for men is a miracle impossibleon earth. He was God. But we are not gods. Suppose I, for instance, sufferintensely. Another can never know how much I suffer, because he is anotherand not I. And what’s more, a man is rarely ready to admit another’ssuffering (as though it were a distinction). Why won’t he admit it, do youthink? Because I smell unpleasant, because I have a stupid face, because Ionce trod on his foot. Besides, there is suffering and suffering;degrading, humiliating suffering such as humbles me—hunger, forinstance—my benefactor will perhaps allow me; but when you come to highersuffering—for an idea, for instance—he will very rarely admit that,perhaps because my face strikes him as not at all what he fancies a manshould have who suffers for an idea. And so he deprives me instantly ofhis favor, and not at all from badness of heart. Beggars, especiallygenteel beggars, ought never to show themselves, but to ask for charitythrough the newspapers. One can love one’s neighbors in the abstract, oreven at a distance, but at close quarters it’s almost impossible. If itwere as on the stage, in the ballet, where if beggars come in, they wearsilken rags and tattered lace and beg for alms dancing gracefully, thenone might like looking at them. But even then we should not love them. Butenough of that. I simply wanted to show you my point of view. I meant tospeak of the suffering of mankind generally, but we had better confineourselves to the sufferings of the children. That reduces the scope of myargument to a tenth of what it would be. Still we’d better keep to thechildren, though it does weaken my case. But, in the first place, childrencan be loved even at close quarters, even when they are dirty, even whenthey are ugly (I fancy, though, children never are ugly). The secondreason why I won’t speak of grown‐up people is that, besides beingdisgusting and unworthy of love, they have a compensation—they’ve eatenthe apple and know good and evil, and they have become ‘like gods.’ Theygo on eating it still. But the children haven’t eaten anything, and are sofar innocent. Are you fond of children, Alyosha? I know you are, and youwill understand why I prefer to speak of them. If they, too, sufferhorribly on earth, they must suffer for their fathers’ sins, they must bepunished for their fathers, who have eaten the apple; but that reasoningis of the other world and is incomprehensible for the heart of man here onearth. The innocent must not suffer for another’s sins, and especiallysuch innocents! You may be surprised at me, Alyosha, but I am awfully fondof children, too. And observe, cruel people, the violent, the rapacious,the Karamazovs are sometimes very fond of children. Children while theyare quite little—up to seven, for instance—are so remote from grown‐uppeople; they are different creatures, as it were, of a different species.I knew a criminal in prison who had, in the course of his career as aburglar, murdered whole families, including several children. But when hewas in prison, he had a strange affection for them. He spent all his timeat his window, watching the children playing in the prison yard. Hetrained one little boy to come up to his window and made great friendswith him.... You don’t know why I am telling you all this, Alyosha? Myhead aches and I am sad.”
“You speak with a strange air,” observed Alyosha uneasily, “as though youwere not quite yourself.”
“By the way, a Bulgarian I met lately in Moscow,” Ivan went on, seemingnot to hear his brother’s words, “told me about the crimes committed byTurks and Circassians in all parts of Bulgaria through fear of a generalrising of the Slavs. They burn villages, murder, outrage women andchildren, they nail their prisoners by the ears to the fences, leave themso till morning, and in the morning they hang them—all sorts of things youcan’t imagine. People talk sometimes of bestial cruelty, but that’s agreat injustice and insult to the beasts; a beast can never be so cruel asa man, so artistically cruel. The tiger only tears and gnaws, that’s allhe can do. He would never think of nailing people by the ears, even if hewere able to do it. These Turks took a pleasure in torturing children,too; cutting the unborn child from the mother’s womb, and tossing babiesup in the air and catching them on the points of their bayonets beforetheir mothers’ eyes. Doing it before the mothers’ eyes was what gave zestto the amusement. Here is another scene that I thought very interesting.Imagine a trembling mother with her baby in her arms, a circle of invadingTurks around her. They’ve planned a diversion: they pet the baby, laugh tomake it laugh. They succeed, the baby laughs. At that moment a Turk pointsa pistol four inches from the baby’s face. The baby laughs with glee,holds out its little hands to the pistol, and he pulls the trigger in thebaby’s face and blows out its brains. Artistic, wasn’t it? By the way,Turks are particularly fond of sweet things, they say.”
“Brother, what are you driving at?” asked Alyosha.
“I think if the devil doesn’t exist, but man has created him, he hascreated him in his own image and likeness.”
“Just as he did God, then?” observed Alyosha.
“ ‘It’s wonderful how you can turn words,’ as Polonius says in _Hamlet_,”laughed Ivan. “You turn my words against me. Well, I am glad. Yours mustbe a fine God, if man created Him in his image and likeness. You askedjust now what I was driving at. You see, I am fond of collecting certainfacts, and, would you believe, I even copy anecdotes of a certain sortfrom newspapers and books, and I’ve already got a fine collection. TheTurks, of course, have gone into it, but they are foreigners. I havespecimens from home that are even better than the Turks. You know weprefer beating—rods and scourges—that’s our national institution. Nailingears is unthinkable for us, for we are, after all, Europeans. But the rodand the scourge we have always with us and they cannot be taken from us.Abroad now they scarcely do any beating. Manners are more humane, or lawshave been passed, so that they don’t dare to flog men now. But they makeup for it in another way just as national as ours. And so national that itwould be practically impossible among us, though I believe we are beinginoculated with it, since the religious movement began in our aristocracy.I have a charming pamphlet, translated from the French, describing how,quite recently, five years ago, a murderer, Richard, was executed—a youngman, I believe, of three and twenty, who repented and was converted to theChristian faith at the very scaffold. This Richard was an illegitimatechild who was given as a child of six by his parents to some shepherds onthe Swiss mountains. They brought him up to work for them. He grew up likea little wild beast among them. The shepherds taught him nothing, andscarcely fed or clothed him, but sent him out at seven to herd the flockin cold and wet, and no one hesitated or scrupled to treat him so. Quitethe contrary, they thought they had every right, for Richard had beengiven to them as a chattel, and they did not even see the necessity offeeding him. Richard himself describes how in those years, like theProdigal Son in the Gospel, he longed to eat of the mash given to thepigs, which were fattened for sale. But they wouldn’t even give him that,and beat him when he stole from the pigs. And that was how he spent allhis childhood and his youth, till he grew up and was strong enough to goaway and be a thief. The savage began to earn his living as a day laborerin Geneva. He drank what he earned, he lived like a brute, and finished bykilling and robbing an old man. He was caught, tried, and condemned todeath. They are not sentimentalists there. And in prison he wasimmediately surrounded by pastors, members of Christian brotherhoods,philanthropic ladies, and the like. They taught him to read and write inprison, and expounded the Gospel to him. They exhorted him, worked uponhim, drummed at him incessantly, till at last he solemnly confessed hiscrime. He was converted. He wrote to the court himself that he was amonster, but that in the end God had vouchsafed him light and shown grace.All Geneva was in excitement about him—all philanthropic and religiousGeneva. All the aristocratic and well‐bred society of the town rushed tothe prison, kissed Richard and embraced him; ‘You are our brother, youhave found grace.’ And Richard does nothing but weep with emotion, ‘Yes,I’ve found grace! All my youth and childhood I was glad of pigs’ food, butnow even I have found grace. I am dying in the Lord.’ ‘Yes, Richard, diein the Lord; you have shed blood and must die. Though it’s not your faultthat you knew not the Lord, when you coveted the pigs’ food and werebeaten for stealing it (which was very wrong of you, for stealing isforbidden); but you’ve shed blood and you must die.’ And on the last day,Richard, perfectly limp, did nothing but cry and repeat every minute:‘This is my happiest day. I am going to the Lord.’ ‘Yes,’ cry the pastorsand the judges and philanthropic ladies. ‘This is the happiest day of yourlife, for you are going to the Lord!’ They all walk or drive to thescaffold in procession behind the prison van. At the scaffold they call toRichard: ‘Die, brother, die in the Lord, for even thou hast found grace!’And so, covered with his brothers’ kisses, Richard is dragged on to thescaffold, and led to the guillotine. And they chopped off his head inbrotherly fashion, because he had found grace. Yes, that’s characteristic.That pamphlet is translated into Russian by some Russian philanthropistsof aristocratic rank and evangelical aspirations, and has been distributedgratis for the enlightenment of the people. The case of Richard isinteresting because it’s national. Though to us it’s absurd to cut off aman’s head, because he has become our brother and has found grace, yet wehave our own speciality, which is all but worse. Our historical pastime isthe direct satisfaction of inflicting pain. There are lines in Nekrassovdescribing how a peasant lashes a horse on the eyes, ‘on its meek eyes,’every one must have seen it. It’s peculiarly Russian. He describes how afeeble little nag has foundered under too heavy a load and cannot move.The peasant beats it, beats it savagely, beats it at last not knowing whathe is doing in the intoxication of cruelty, thrashes it mercilessly overand over again. ‘However weak you are, you must pull, if you die for it.’The nag strains, and then he begins lashing the poor defenseless creatureon its weeping, on its ‘meek eyes.’ The frantic beast tugs and draws theload, trembling all over, gasping for breath, moving sideways, with a sortof unnatural spasmodic action—it’s awful in Nekrassov. But that’s only ahorse, and God has given horses to be beaten. So the Tatars have taughtus, and they left us the knout as a remembrance of it. But men, too, canbe beaten. A well‐educated, cultured gentleman and his wife beat their ownchild with a birch‐rod, a girl of seven. I have an exact account of it.The papa was glad that the birch was covered with twigs. ‘It stings more,’said he, and so he began stinging his daughter. I know for a fact thereare people who at every blow are worked up to sensuality, to literalsensuality, which increases progressively at every blow they inflict. Theybeat for a minute, for five minutes, for ten minutes, more often and moresavagely. The child screams. At last the child cannot scream, it gasps,‘Daddy! daddy!’ By some diabolical unseemly chance the case was broughtinto court. A counsel is engaged. The Russian people have long called abarrister ‘a conscience for hire.’ The counsel protests in his client’sdefense. ‘It’s such a simple thing,’ he says, ‘an everyday domestic event.A father corrects his child. To our shame be it said, it is brought intocourt.’ The jury, convinced by him, give a favorable verdict. The publicroars with delight that the torturer is acquitted. Ah, pity I wasn’tthere! I would have proposed to raise a subscription in his honor!Charming pictures.
“But I’ve still better things about children. I’ve collected a great,great deal about Russian children, Alyosha. There was a little girl offive who was hated by her father and mother, ‘most worthy and respectablepeople, of good education and breeding.’ You see, I must repeat again, itis a peculiar characteristic of many people, this love of torturingchildren, and children only. To all other types of humanity thesetorturers behave mildly and benevolently, like cultivated and humaneEuropeans; but they are very fond of tormenting children, even fond ofchildren themselves in that sense. It’s just their defenselessness thattempts the tormentor, just the angelic confidence of the child who has norefuge and no appeal, that sets his vile blood on fire. In every man, ofcourse, a demon lies hidden—the demon of rage, the demon of lustful heatat the screams of the tortured victim, the demon of lawlessness let offthe chain, the demon of diseases that follow on vice, gout, kidneydisease, and so on.
“This poor child of five was subjected to every possible torture by thosecultivated parents. They beat her, thrashed her, kicked her for no reasontill her body was one bruise. Then, they went to greater refinements ofcruelty—shut her up all night in the cold and frost in a privy, andbecause she didn’t ask to be taken up at night (as though a child of fivesleeping its angelic, sound sleep could be trained to wake and ask), theysmeared her face and filled her mouth with excrement, and it was hermother, her mother did this. And that mother could sleep, hearing the poorchild’s groans! Can you understand why a little creature, who can’t evenunderstand what’s done to her, should beat her little aching heart withher tiny fist in the dark and the cold, and weep her meek unresentfultears to dear, kind God to protect her? Do you understand that, friend andbrother, you pious and humble novice? Do you understand why this infamymust be and is permitted? Without it, I am told, man could not haveexisted on earth, for he could not have known good and evil. Why should heknow that diabolical good and evil when it costs so much? Why, the wholeworld of knowledge is not worth that child’s prayer to ‘dear, kind God’! Isay nothing of the sufferings of grown‐up people, they have eaten theapple, damn them, and the devil take them all! But these little ones! I ammaking you suffer, Alyosha, you are not yourself. I’ll leave off if youlike.”
“Never mind. I want to suffer too,” muttered Alyosha.
“One picture, only one more, because it’s so curious, so characteristic,and I have only just read it in some collection of Russian antiquities.I’ve forgotten the name. I must look it up. It was in the darkest days ofserfdom at the beginning of the century, and long live the Liberator ofthe People! There was in those days a general of aristocratic connections,the owner of great estates, one of those men—somewhat exceptional, Ibelieve, even then—who, retiring from the service into a life of leisure,are convinced that they’ve earned absolute power over the lives of theirsubjects. There were such men then. So our general, settled on hisproperty of two thousand souls, lives in pomp, and domineers over his poorneighbors as though they were dependents and buffoons. He has kennels ofhundreds of hounds and nearly a hundred dog‐boys—all mounted, and inuniform. One day a serf‐boy, a little child of eight, threw a stone inplay and hurt the paw of the general’s favorite hound. ‘Why is my favoritedog lame?’ He is told that the boy threw a stone that hurt the dog’s paw.‘So you did it.’ The general looked the child up and down. ‘Take him.’ Hewas taken—taken from his mother and kept shut up all night. Early thatmorning the general comes out on horseback, with the hounds, hisdependents, dog‐boys, and huntsmen, all mounted around him in full huntingparade. The servants are summoned for their edification, and in front ofthem all stands the mother of the child. The child is brought from thelock‐up. It’s a gloomy, cold, foggy autumn day, a capital day for hunting.The general orders the child to be undressed; the child is stripped naked.He shivers, numb with terror, not daring to cry.... ‘Make him run,’commands the general. ‘Run! run!’ shout the dog‐boys. The boy runs.... ‘Athim!’ yells the general, and he sets the whole pack of hounds on thechild. The hounds catch him, and tear him to pieces before his mother’seyes!... I believe the general was afterwards declared incapable ofadministering his estates. Well—what did he deserve? To be shot? To beshot for the satisfaction of our moral feelings? Speak, Alyosha!”
“To be shot,” murmured Alyosha, lifting his eyes to Ivan with a pale,twisted smile.
“Bravo!” cried Ivan, delighted. “If even you say so.... You’re a prettymonk! So there is a little devil sitting in your heart, AlyoshaKaramazov!”
“What I said was absurd, but—”
“That’s just the point, that ‘but’!” cried Ivan. “Let me tell you, novice,that the absurd is only too necessary on earth. The world stands onabsurdities, and perhaps nothing would have come to pass in it withoutthem. We know what we know!”
“What do you know?”
“I understand nothing,” Ivan went on, as though in delirium. “I don’t wantto understand anything now. I want to stick to the fact. I made up my mindlong ago not to understand. If I try to understand anything, I shall befalse to the fact, and I have determined to stick to the fact.”
“Why are you trying me?” Alyosha cried, with sudden distress. “Will yousay what you mean at last?”
“Of course, I will; that’s what I’ve been leading up to. You are dear tome, I don’t want to let you go, and I won’t give you up to your Zossima.”
Ivan for a minute was silent, his face became all at once very sad.
“Listen! I took the case of children only to make my case clearer. Of theother tears of humanity with which the earth is soaked from its crust toits center, I will say nothing. I have narrowed my subject on purpose. Iam a bug, and I recognize in all humility that I cannot understand why theworld is arranged as it is. Men are themselves to blame, I suppose; theywere given paradise, they wanted freedom, and stole fire from heaven,though they knew they would become unhappy, so there is no need to pitythem. With my pitiful, earthly, Euclidian understanding, all I know isthat there is suffering and that there are none guilty; that cause followseffect, simply and directly; that everything flows and finds its level—butthat’s only Euclidian nonsense, I know that, and I can’t consent to liveby it! What comfort is it to me that there are none guilty and that causefollows effect simply and directly, and that I know it?—I must havejustice, or I will destroy myself. And not justice in some remote infinitetime and space, but here on earth, and that I could see myself. I havebelieved in it. I want to see it, and if I am dead by then, let me riseagain, for if it all happens without me, it will be too unfair. Surely Ihaven’t suffered, simply that I, my crimes and my sufferings, may manurethe soil of the future harmony for somebody else. I want to see with myown eyes the hind lie down with the lion and the victim rise up andembrace his murderer. I want to be there when every one suddenlyunderstands what it has all been for. All the religions of the world arebuilt on this longing, and I am a believer. But then there are thechildren, and what am I to do about them? That’s a question I can’tanswer. For the hundredth time I repeat, there are numbers of questions,but I’ve only taken the children, because in their case what I mean is sounanswerably clear. Listen! If all must suffer to pay for the eternalharmony, what have children to do with it, tell me, please? It’s beyondall comprehension why they should suffer, and why they should pay for theharmony. Why should they, too, furnish material to enrich the soil for theharmony of the future? I understand solidarity in sin among men. Iunderstand solidarity in retribution, too; but there can be no suchsolidarity with children. And if it is really true that they must shareresponsibility for all their fathers’ crimes, such a truth is not of thisworld and is beyond my comprehension. Some jester will say, perhaps, thatthe child would have grown up and have sinned, but you see he didn’t growup, he was torn to pieces by the dogs, at eight years old. Oh, Alyosha, Iam not blaspheming! I understand, of course, what an upheaval of theuniverse it will be, when everything in heaven and earth blends in onehymn of praise and everything that lives and has lived cries aloud: ‘Thouart just, O Lord, for Thy ways are revealed.’ When the mother embraces thefiend who threw her child to the dogs, and all three cry aloud with tears,‘Thou art just, O Lord!’ then, of course, the crown of knowledge will bereached and all will be made clear. But what pulls me up here is that Ican’t accept that harmony. And while I am on earth, I make haste to takemy own measures. You see, Alyosha, perhaps it really may happen that if Ilive to that moment, or rise again to see it, I, too, perhaps, may cryaloud with the rest, looking at the mother embracing the child’s torturer,‘Thou art just, O Lord!’ but I don’t want to cry aloud then. While thereis still time, I hasten to protect myself, and so I renounce the higherharmony altogether. It’s not worth the tears of that one tortured childwho beat itself on the breast with its little fist and prayed in itsstinking outhouse, with its unexpiated tears to ‘dear, kind God’! It’s notworth it, because those tears are unatoned for. They must be atoned for,or there can be no harmony. But how? How are you going to atone for them?Is it possible? By their being avenged? But what do I care for avengingthem? What do I care for a hell for oppressors? What good can hell do,since those children have already been tortured? And what becomes ofharmony, if there is hell? I want to forgive. I want to embrace. I don’twant more suffering. And if the sufferings of children go to swell the sumof sufferings which was necessary to pay for truth, then I protest thatthe truth is not worth such a price. I don’t want the mother to embracethe oppressor who threw her son to the dogs! She dare not forgive him! Lether forgive him for herself, if she will, let her forgive the torturer forthe immeasurable suffering of her mother’s heart. But the sufferings ofher tortured child she has no right to forgive; she dare not forgive thetorturer, even if the child were to forgive him! And if that is so, ifthey dare not forgive, what becomes of harmony? Is there in the wholeworld a being who would have the right to forgive and could forgive? Idon’t want harmony. From love for humanity I don’t want it. I would ratherbe left with the unavenged suffering. I would rather remain with myunavenged suffering and unsatisfied indignation, _even if I were wrong_.Besides, too high a price is asked for harmony; it’s beyond our means topay so much to enter on it. And so I hasten to give back my entranceticket, and if I am an honest man I am bound to give it back as soon aspossible. And that I am doing. It’s not God that I don’t accept, Alyosha,only I most respectfully return Him the ticket.”
“That’s rebellion,” murmured Alyosha, looking down.
“Rebellion? I am sorry you call it that,” said Ivan earnestly. “One canhardly live in rebellion, and I want to live. Tell me yourself, Ichallenge you—answer. Imagine that you are creating a fabric of humandestiny with the object of making men happy in the end, giving them peaceand rest at last, but that it was essential and inevitable to torture todeath only one tiny creature—that baby beating its breast with its fist,for instance—and to found that edifice on its unavenged tears, would youconsent to be the architect on those conditions? Tell me, and tell thetruth.”
“No, I wouldn’t consent,” said Alyosha softly.
“And can you admit the idea that men for whom you are building it wouldagree to accept their happiness on the foundation of the unexpiated bloodof a little victim? And accepting it would remain happy for ever?”
“No, I can’t admit it. Brother,” said Alyosha suddenly, with flashingeyes, “you said just now, is there a being in the whole world who wouldhave the right to forgive and could forgive? But there is a Being and Hecan forgive everything, all and for all, because He gave His innocentblood for all and everything. You have forgotten Him, and on Him is builtthe edifice, and it is to Him they cry aloud, ‘Thou art just, O Lord, forThy ways are revealed!’ ”
“Ah! the One without sin and His blood! No, I have not forgotten Him; onthe contrary I’ve been wondering all the time how it was you did not bringHim in before, for usually all arguments on your side put Him in theforeground. Do you know, Alyosha—don’t laugh! I made a poem about a yearago. If you can waste another ten minutes on me, I’ll tell it to you.”
“You wrote a poem?”
“Oh, no, I didn’t write it,” laughed Ivan, “and I’ve never written twolines of poetry in my life. But I made up this poem in prose and Iremembered it. I was carried away when I made it up. You will be my firstreader—that is listener. Why should an author forego even one listener?”smiled Ivan. “Shall I tell it to you?”
“I am all attention,” said Alyosha.
“My poem is called ‘The Grand Inquisitor’; it’s a ridiculous thing, but Iwant to tell it to you.”


Chapter V. The Grand Inquisitor

“Even this must have a preface—that is, a literary preface,” laughed Ivan,“and I am a poor hand at making one. You see, my action takes place in thesixteenth century, and at that time, as you probably learnt at school, itwas customary in poetry to bring down heavenly powers on earth. Not tospeak of Dante, in France, clerks, as well as the monks in themonasteries, used to give regular performances in which the Madonna, thesaints, the angels, Christ, and God himself were brought on the stage. Inthose days it was done in all simplicity. In Victor Hugo’s _Notre Dame deParis_ an edifying and gratuitous spectacle was provided for the people inthe Hôtel de Ville of Paris in the reign of Louis XI. in honor of thebirth of the dauphin. It was called _Le bon jugement de la très sainte etgracieuse Vierge Marie_, and she appears herself on the stage andpronounces her _bon jugement_. Similar plays, chiefly from the OldTestament, were occasionally performed in Moscow too, up to the times ofPeter the Great. But besides plays there were all sorts of legends andballads scattered about the world, in which the saints and angels and allthe powers of Heaven took part when required. In our monasteries the monksbusied themselves in translating, copying, and even composing suchpoems—and even under the Tatars. There is, for instance, one such poem (ofcourse, from the Greek), _The Wanderings of Our Lady through Hell_, withdescriptions as bold as Dante’s. Our Lady visits hell, and the ArchangelMichael leads her through the torments. She sees the sinners and theirpunishment. There she sees among others one noteworthy set of sinners in aburning lake; some of them sink to the bottom of the lake so that theycan’t swim out, and ‘these God forgets’—an expression of extraordinarydepth and force. And so Our Lady, shocked and weeping, falls before thethrone of God and begs for mercy for all in hell—for all she has seenthere, indiscriminately. Her conversation with God is immenselyinteresting. She beseeches Him, she will not desist, and when God pointsto the hands and feet of her Son, nailed to the Cross, and asks, ‘How canI forgive His tormentors?’ she bids all the saints, all the martyrs, allthe angels and archangels to fall down with her and pray for mercy on allwithout distinction. It ends by her winning from God a respite ofsuffering every year from Good Friday till Trinity Day, and the sinners atonce raise a cry of thankfulness from hell, chanting, ‘Thou art just, OLord, in this judgment.’ Well, my poem would have been of that kind if ithad appeared at that time. He comes on the scene in my poem, but He saysnothing, only appears and passes on. Fifteen centuries have passed sinceHe promised to come in His glory, fifteen centuries since His prophetwrote, ‘Behold, I come quickly’; ‘Of that day and that hour knoweth noman, neither the Son, but the Father,’ as He Himself predicted on earth.But humanity awaits him with the same faith and with the same love. Oh,with greater faith, for it is fifteen centuries since man has ceased tosee signs from heaven.

    No signs from heaven come to‐day    To add to what the heart doth say.

There was nothing left but faith in what the heart doth say. It is truethere were many miracles in those days. There were saints who performedmiraculous cures; some holy people, according to their biographies, werevisited by the Queen of Heaven herself. But the devil did not slumber, anddoubts were already arising among men of the truth of these miracles. Andjust then there appeared in the north of Germany a terrible new heresy. “Ahuge star like to a torch” (that is, to a church) “fell on the sources ofthe waters and they became bitter.” These heretics began blasphemouslydenying miracles. But those who remained faithful were all the more ardentin their faith. The tears of humanity rose up to Him as before, awaitedHis coming, loved Him, hoped for Him, yearned to suffer and die for Him asbefore. And so many ages mankind had prayed with faith and fervor, “O Lordour God, hasten Thy coming,” so many ages called upon Him, that in Hisinfinite mercy He deigned to come down to His servants. Before that day Hehad come down, He had visited some holy men, martyrs and hermits, as iswritten in their lives. Among us, Tyutchev, with absolute faith in thetruth of his words, bore witness that

    Bearing the Cross, in slavish dress,    Weary and worn, the Heavenly King    Our mother, Russia, came to bless,    And through our land went wandering.

And that certainly was so, I assure you.
“And behold, He deigned to appear for a moment to the people, to thetortured, suffering people, sunk in iniquity, but loving Him likechildren. My story is laid in Spain, in Seville, in the most terrible timeof the Inquisition, when fires were lighted every day to the glory of God,and ‘in the splendid _auto da fé_ the wicked heretics were burnt.’ Oh, ofcourse, this was not the coming in which He will appear according to Hispromise at the end of time in all His heavenly glory, and which will besudden ‘as lightning flashing from east to west.’ No, He visited Hischildren only for a moment, and there where the flames were cracklinground the heretics. In His infinite mercy He came once more among men inthat human shape in which He walked among men for three years fifteencenturies ago. He came down to the ‘hot pavements’ of the southern town inwhich on the day before almost a hundred heretics had, _ad majorem gloriamDei_, been burnt by the cardinal, the Grand Inquisitor, in a magnificent_auto da fé_, in the presence of the king, the court, the knights, thecardinals, the most charming ladies of the court, and the whole populationof Seville.
“He came softly, unobserved, and yet, strange to say, every one recognizedHim. That might be one of the best passages in the poem. I mean, why theyrecognized Him. The people are irresistibly drawn to Him, they surroundHim, they flock about Him, follow Him. He moves silently in their midstwith a gentle smile of infinite compassion. The sun of love burns in Hisheart, light and power shine from His eyes, and their radiance, shed onthe people, stirs their hearts with responsive love. He holds out Hishands to them, blesses them, and a healing virtue comes from contact withHim, even with His garments. An old man in the crowd, blind fromchildhood, cries out, ‘O Lord, heal me and I shall see Thee!’ and, as itwere, scales fall from his eyes and the blind man sees Him. The crowdweeps and kisses the earth under His feet. Children throw flowers beforeHim, sing, and cry hosannah. ‘It is He—it is He!’ all repeat. ‘It must beHe, it can be no one but Him!’ He stops at the steps of the Sevillecathedral at the moment when the weeping mourners are bringing in a littleopen white coffin. In it lies a child of seven, the only daughter of aprominent citizen. The dead child lies hidden in flowers. ‘He will raiseyour child,’ the crowd shouts to the weeping mother. The priest, coming tomeet the coffin, looks perplexed, and frowns, but the mother of the deadchild throws herself at His feet with a wail. ‘If it is Thou, raise mychild!’ she cries, holding out her hands to Him. The procession halts, thecoffin is laid on the steps at His feet. He looks with compassion, and Hislips once more softly pronounce, ‘Maiden, arise!’ and the maiden arises.The little girl sits up in the coffin and looks round, smiling with wide‐open wondering eyes, holding a bunch of white roses they had put in herhand.
“There are cries, sobs, confusion among the people, and at that moment thecardinal himself, the Grand Inquisitor, passes by the cathedral. He is anold man, almost ninety, tall and erect, with a withered face and sunkeneyes, in which there is still a gleam of light. He is not dressed in hisgorgeous cardinal’s robes, as he was the day before, when he was burningthe enemies of the Roman Church—at this moment he is wearing his coarse,old, monk’s cassock. At a distance behind him come his gloomy assistantsand slaves and the ‘holy guard.’ He stops at the sight of the crowd andwatches it from a distance. He sees everything; he sees them set thecoffin down at His feet, sees the child rise up, and his face darkens. Heknits his thick gray brows and his eyes gleam with a sinister fire. Heholds out his finger and bids the guards take Him. And such is his power,so completely are the people cowed into submission and trembling obedienceto him, that the crowd immediately makes way for the guards, and in themidst of deathlike silence they lay hands on Him and lead Him away. Thecrowd instantly bows down to the earth, like one man, before the oldInquisitor. He blesses the people in silence and passes on. The guardslead their prisoner to the close, gloomy vaulted prison in the ancientpalace of the Holy Inquisition and shut Him in it. The day passes and isfollowed by the dark, burning, ‘breathless’ night of Seville. The air is‘fragrant with laurel and lemon.’ In the pitch darkness the iron door ofthe prison is suddenly opened and the Grand Inquisitor himself comes inwith a light in his hand. He is alone; the door is closed at once behindhim. He stands in the doorway and for a minute or two gazes into His face.At last he goes up slowly, sets the light on the table and speaks.
“ ‘Is it Thou? Thou?’ but receiving no answer, he adds at once, ‘Don’tanswer, be silent. What canst Thou say, indeed? I know too well what Thouwouldst say. And Thou hast no right to add anything to what Thou hadstsaid of old. Why, then, art Thou come to hinder us? For Thou hast come tohinder us, and Thou knowest that. But dost Thou know what will be to‐morrow? I know not who Thou art and care not to know whether it is Thou oronly a semblance of Him, but to‐morrow I shall condemn Thee and burn Theeat the stake as the worst of heretics. And the very people who have to‐daykissed Thy feet, to‐morrow at the faintest sign from me will rush to heapup the embers of Thy fire. Knowest Thou that? Yes, maybe Thou knowest it,’he added with thoughtful penetration, never for a moment taking his eyesoff the Prisoner.”
“I don’t quite understand, Ivan. What does it mean?” Alyosha, who had beenlistening in silence, said with a smile. “Is it simply a wild fantasy, ora mistake on the part of the old man—some impossible _quiproquo_?”
“Take it as the last,” said Ivan, laughing, “if you are so corrupted bymodern realism and can’t stand anything fantastic. If you like it to be acase of mistaken identity, let it be so. It is true,” he went on,laughing, “the old man was ninety, and he might well be crazy over his setidea. He might have been struck by the appearance of the Prisoner. Itmight, in fact, be simply his ravings, the delusion of an old man ofninety, over‐excited by the _auto da fé_ of a hundred heretics the daybefore. But does it matter to us after all whether it was a mistake ofidentity or a wild fantasy? All that matters is that the old man shouldspeak out, should speak openly of what he has thought in silence forninety years.”
“And the Prisoner too is silent? Does He look at him and not say a word?”
“That’s inevitable in any case,” Ivan laughed again. “The old man has toldHim He hasn’t the right to add anything to what He has said of old. Onemay say it is the most fundamental feature of Roman Catholicism, in myopinion at least. ‘All has been given by Thee to the Pope,’ they say, ‘andall, therefore, is still in the Pope’s hands, and there is no need forThee to come now at all. Thou must not meddle for the time, at least.’That’s how they speak and write too—the Jesuits, at any rate. I have readit myself in the works of their theologians. ‘Hast Thou the right toreveal to us one of the mysteries of that world from which Thou hastcome?’ my old man asks Him, and answers the question for Him. ‘No, Thouhast not; that Thou mayest not add to what has been said of old, andmayest not take from men the freedom which Thou didst exalt when Thou waston earth. Whatsoever Thou revealest anew will encroach on men’s freedom offaith; for it will be manifest as a miracle, and the freedom of theirfaith was dearer to Thee than anything in those days fifteen hundred yearsago. Didst Thou not often say then, “I will make you free”? But now Thouhast seen these “free” men,’ the old man adds suddenly, with a pensivesmile. ‘Yes, we’ve paid dearly for it,’ he goes on, looking sternly atHim, ‘but at last we have completed that work in Thy name. For fifteencenturies we have been wrestling with Thy freedom, but now it is ended andover for good. Dost Thou not believe that it’s over for good? Thou lookestmeekly at me and deignest not even to be wroth with me. But let me tellThee that now, to‐day, people are more persuaded than ever that they haveperfect freedom, yet they have brought their freedom to us and laid ithumbly at our feet. But that has been our doing. Was this what Thou didst?Was this Thy freedom?’ ”
“I don’t understand again,” Alyosha broke in. “Is he ironical, is hejesting?”
“Not a bit of it! He claims it as a merit for himself and his Church thatat last they have vanquished freedom and have done so to make men happy.‘For now’ (he is speaking of the Inquisition, of course) ‘for the firsttime it has become possible to think of the happiness of men. Man wascreated a rebel; and how can rebels be happy? Thou wast warned,’ he saysto Him. ‘Thou hast had no lack of admonitions and warnings, but Thou didstnot listen to those warnings; Thou didst reject the only way by which menmight be made happy. But, fortunately, departing Thou didst hand on thework to us. Thou hast promised, Thou hast established by Thy word, Thouhast given to us the right to bind and to unbind, and now, of course, Thoucanst not think of taking it away. Why, then, hast Thou come to hinderus?’ ”
“And what’s the meaning of ‘no lack of admonitions and warnings’?” askedAlyosha.
“Why, that’s the chief part of what the old man must say.
“ ‘The wise and dread spirit, the spirit of self‐destruction and non‐existence,’ the old man goes on, ‘the great spirit talked with Thee in thewilderness, and we are told in the books that he “tempted” Thee. Is thatso? And could anything truer be said than what he revealed to Thee inthree questions and what Thou didst reject, and what in the books iscalled “the temptation”? And yet if there has ever been on earth a realstupendous miracle, it took place on that day, on the day of the threetemptations. The statement of those three questions was itself themiracle. If it were possible to imagine simply for the sake of argumentthat those three questions of the dread spirit had perished utterly fromthe books, and that we had to restore them and to invent them anew, and todo so had gathered together all the wise men of the earth—rulers, chiefpriests, learned men, philosophers, poets—and had set them the task toinvent three questions, such as would not only fit the occasion, butexpress in three words, three human phrases, the whole future history ofthe world and of humanity—dost Thou believe that all the wisdom of theearth united could have invented anything in depth and force equal to thethree questions which were actually put to Thee then by the wise andmighty spirit in the wilderness? From those questions alone, from themiracle of their statement, we can see that we have here to do not withthe fleeting human intelligence, but with the absolute and eternal. For inthose three questions the whole subsequent history of mankind is, as itwere, brought together into one whole, and foretold, and in them areunited all the unsolved historical contradictions of human nature. At thetime it could not be so clear, since the future was unknown; but now thatfifteen hundred years have passed, we see that everything in those threequestions was so justly divined and foretold, and has been so trulyfulfilled, that nothing can be added to them or taken from them.
“ ‘Judge Thyself who was right—Thou or he who questioned Thee then?Remember the first question; its meaning, in other words, was this: “Thouwouldst go into the world, and art going with empty hands, with somepromise of freedom which men in their simplicity and their naturalunruliness cannot even understand, which they fear and dread—for nothinghas ever been more insupportable for a man and a human society thanfreedom. But seest Thou these stones in this parched and barrenwilderness? Turn them into bread, and mankind will run after Thee like aflock of sheep, grateful and obedient, though for ever trembling, lestThou withdraw Thy hand and deny them Thy bread.” But Thou wouldst notdeprive man of freedom and didst reject the offer, thinking, what is thatfreedom worth, if obedience is bought with bread? Thou didst reply thatman lives not by bread alone. But dost Thou know that for the sake of thatearthly bread the spirit of the earth will rise up against Thee and willstrive with Thee and overcome Thee, and all will follow him, crying, “Whocan compare with this beast? He has given us fire from heaven!” Dost Thouknow that the ages will pass, and humanity will proclaim by the lips oftheir sages that there is no crime, and therefore no sin; there is onlyhunger? “Feed men, and then ask of them virtue!” that’s what they’ll writeon the banner, which they will raise against Thee, and with which theywill destroy Thy temple. Where Thy temple stood will rise a new building;the terrible tower of Babel will be built again, and though, like the oneof old, it will not be finished, yet Thou mightest have prevented that newtower and have cut short the sufferings of men for a thousand years; forthey will come back to us after a thousand years of agony with theirtower. They will seek us again, hidden underground in the catacombs, forwe shall be again persecuted and tortured. They will find us and cry tous, “Feed us, for those who have promised us fire from heaven haven’tgiven it!” And then we shall finish building their tower, for he finishesthe building who feeds them. And we alone shall feed them in Thy name,declaring falsely that it is in Thy name. Oh, never, never can they feedthemselves without us! No science will give them bread so long as theyremain free. In the end they will lay their freedom at our feet, and sayto us, “Make us your slaves, but feed us.” They will understandthemselves, at last, that freedom and bread enough for all areinconceivable together, for never, never will they be able to sharebetween them! They will be convinced, too, that they can never be free,for they are weak, vicious, worthless and rebellious. Thou didst promisethem the bread of Heaven, but, I repeat again, can it compare with earthlybread in the eyes of the weak, ever sinful and ignoble race of man? And iffor the sake of the bread of Heaven thousands shall follow Thee, what isto become of the millions and tens of thousands of millions of creatureswho will not have the strength to forego the earthly bread for the sake ofthe heavenly? Or dost Thou care only for the tens of thousands of thegreat and strong, while the millions, numerous as the sands of the sea,who are weak but love Thee, must exist only for the sake of the great andstrong? No, we care for the weak too. They are sinful and rebellious, butin the end they too will become obedient. They will marvel at us and lookon us as gods, because we are ready to endure the freedom which they havefound so dreadful and to rule over them—so awful it will seem to them tobe free. But we shall tell them that we are Thy servants and rule them inThy name. We shall deceive them again, for we will not let Thee come to usagain. That deception will be our suffering, for we shall be forced tolie.
“ ‘This is the significance of the first question in the wilderness, andthis is what Thou hast rejected for the sake of that freedom which Thouhast exalted above everything. Yet in this question lies hid the greatsecret of this world. Choosing “bread,” Thou wouldst have satisfied theuniversal and everlasting craving of humanity—to find some one to worship.So long as man remains free he strives for nothing so incessantly and sopainfully as to find some one to worship. But man seeks to worship what isestablished beyond dispute, so that all men would agree at once to worshipit. For these pitiful creatures are concerned not only to find what one orthe other can worship, but to find something that all would believe in andworship; what is essential is that all may be _together_ in it. Thiscraving for _community_ of worship is the chief misery of every manindividually and of all humanity from the beginning of time. For the sakeof common worship they’ve slain each other with the sword. They have setup gods and challenged one another, “Put away your gods and come andworship ours, or we will kill you and your gods!” And so it will be to theend of the world, even when gods disappear from the earth; they will falldown before idols just the same. Thou didst know, Thou couldst not buthave known, this fundamental secret of human nature, but Thou didst rejectthe one infallible banner which was offered Thee to make all men bow downto Thee alone—the banner of earthly bread; and Thou hast rejected it forthe sake of freedom and the bread of Heaven. Behold what Thou didstfurther. And all again in the name of freedom! I tell Thee that man istormented by no greater anxiety than to find some one quickly to whom hecan hand over that gift of freedom with which the ill‐fated creature isborn. But only one who can appease their conscience can take over theirfreedom. In bread there was offered Thee an invincible banner; give bread,and man will worship thee, for nothing is more certain than bread. But ifsome one else gains possession of his conscience—oh! then he will castaway Thy bread and follow after him who has ensnared his conscience. Inthat Thou wast right. For the secret of man’s being is not only to livebut to have something to live for. Without a stable conception of theobject of life, man would not consent to go on living, and would ratherdestroy himself than remain on earth, though he had bread in abundance.That is true. But what happened? Instead of taking men’s freedom fromthem, Thou didst make it greater than ever! Didst Thou forget that manprefers peace, and even death, to freedom of choice in the knowledge ofgood and evil? Nothing is more seductive for man than his freedom ofconscience, but nothing is a greater cause of suffering. And behold,instead of giving a firm foundation for setting the conscience of man atrest for ever, Thou didst choose all that is exceptional, vague andenigmatic; Thou didst choose what was utterly beyond the strength of men,acting as though Thou didst not love them at all—Thou who didst come togive Thy life for them! Instead of taking possession of men’s freedom,Thou didst increase it, and burdened the spiritual kingdom of mankind withits sufferings for ever. Thou didst desire man’s free love, that he shouldfollow Thee freely, enticed and taken captive by Thee. In place of therigid ancient law, man must hereafter with free heart decide for himselfwhat is good and what is evil, having only Thy image before him as hisguide. But didst Thou not know that he would at last reject even Thy imageand Thy truth, if he is weighed down with the fearful burden of freechoice? They will cry aloud at last that the truth is not in Thee, forthey could not have been left in greater confusion and suffering than Thouhast caused, laying upon them so many cares and unanswerable problems.
“ ‘So that, in truth, Thou didst Thyself lay the foundation for thedestruction of Thy kingdom, and no one is more to blame for it. Yet whatwas offered Thee? There are three powers, three powers alone, able toconquer and to hold captive for ever the conscience of these impotentrebels for their happiness—those forces are miracle, mystery andauthority. Thou hast rejected all three and hast set the example for doingso. When the wise and dread spirit set Thee on the pinnacle of the templeand said to Thee, “If Thou wouldst know whether Thou art the Son of Godthen cast Thyself down, for it is written: the angels shall hold him uplest he fall and bruise himself, and Thou shalt know then whether Thou artthe Son of God and shalt prove then how great is Thy faith in Thy Father.”But Thou didst refuse and wouldst not cast Thyself down. Oh, of course,Thou didst proudly and well, like God; but the weak, unruly race of men,are they gods? Oh, Thou didst know then that in taking one step, in makingone movement to cast Thyself down, Thou wouldst be tempting God and havelost all Thy faith in Him, and wouldst have been dashed to pieces againstthat earth which Thou didst come to save. And the wise spirit that temptedThee would have rejoiced. But I ask again, are there many like Thee? Andcouldst Thou believe for one moment that men, too, could face such atemptation? Is the nature of men such, that they can reject miracle, andat the great moments of their life, the moments of their deepest, mostagonizing spiritual difficulties, cling only to the free verdict of theheart? Oh, Thou didst know that Thy deed would be recorded in books, wouldbe handed down to remote times and the utmost ends of the earth, and Thoudidst hope that man, following Thee, would cling to God and not ask for amiracle. But Thou didst not know that when man rejects miracle he rejectsGod too; for man seeks not so much God as the miraculous. And as mancannot bear to be without the miraculous, he will create new miracles ofhis own for himself, and will worship deeds of sorcery and witchcraft,though he might be a hundred times over a rebel, heretic and infidel. Thoudidst not come down from the Cross when they shouted to Thee, mocking andreviling Thee, “Come down from the cross and we will believe that Thou artHe.” Thou didst not come down, for again Thou wouldst not enslave man by amiracle, and didst crave faith given freely, not based on miracle. Thoudidst crave for free love and not the base raptures of the slave beforethe might that has overawed him for ever. But Thou didst think too highlyof men therein, for they are slaves, of course, though rebellious bynature. Look round and judge; fifteen centuries have passed, look uponthem. Whom hast Thou raised up to Thyself? I swear, man is weaker andbaser by nature than Thou hast believed him! Can he, can he do what Thoudidst? By showing him so much respect, Thou didst, as it were, cease tofeel for him, for Thou didst ask far too much from him—Thou who hast lovedhim more than Thyself! Respecting him less, Thou wouldst have asked lessof him. That would have been more like love, for his burden would havebeen lighter. He is weak and vile. What though he is everywhere nowrebelling against our power, and proud of his rebellion? It is the prideof a child and a schoolboy. They are little children rioting and barringout the teacher at school. But their childish delight will end; it willcost them dear. They will cast down temples and drench the earth withblood. But they will see at last, the foolish children, that, though theyare rebels, they are impotent rebels, unable to keep up their ownrebellion. Bathed in their foolish tears, they will recognize at last thatHe who created them rebels must have meant to mock at them. They will saythis in despair, and their utterance will be a blasphemy which will makethem more unhappy still, for man’s nature cannot bear blasphemy, and inthe end always avenges it on itself. And so unrest, confusion andunhappiness—that is the present lot of man after Thou didst bear so muchfor their freedom! The great prophet tells in vision and in image, that hesaw all those who took part in the first resurrection and that there wereof each tribe twelve thousand. But if there were so many of them, theymust have been not men but gods. They had borne Thy cross, they hadendured scores of years in the barren, hungry wilderness, living uponlocusts and roots—and Thou mayest indeed point with pride at thosechildren of freedom, of free love, of free and splendid sacrifice for Thyname. But remember that they were only some thousands; and what of therest? And how are the other weak ones to blame, because they could notendure what the strong have endured? How is the weak soul to blame that itis unable to receive such terrible gifts? Canst Thou have simply come tothe elect and for the elect? But if so, it is a mystery and we cannotunderstand it. And if it is a mystery, we too have a right to preach amystery, and to teach them that it’s not the free judgment of theirhearts, not love that matters, but a mystery which they must followblindly, even against their conscience. So we have done. We have correctedThy work and have founded it upon _miracle_, _mystery_ and _authority_.And men rejoiced that they were again led like sheep, and that theterrible gift that had brought them such suffering was, at last, liftedfrom their hearts. Were we right teaching them this? Speak! Did we notlove mankind, so meekly acknowledging their feebleness, lovinglylightening their burden, and permitting their weak nature even sin withour sanction? Why hast Thou come now to hinder us? And why dost Thou looksilently and searchingly at me with Thy mild eyes? Be angry. I don’t wantThy love, for I love Thee not. And what use is it for me to hide anythingfrom Thee? Don’t I know to Whom I am speaking? All that I can say is knownto Thee already. And is it for me to conceal from Thee our mystery?Perhaps it is Thy will to hear it from my lips. Listen, then. We are notworking with Thee, but with _him_—that is our mystery. It’s long—eightcenturies—since we have been on _his_ side and not on Thine. Just eightcenturies ago, we took from him what Thou didst reject with scorn, thatlast gift he offered Thee, showing Thee all the kingdoms of the earth. Wetook from him Rome and the sword of Cæsar, and proclaimed ourselves solerulers of the earth, though hitherto we have not been able to complete ourwork. But whose fault is that? Oh, the work is only beginning, but it hasbegun. It has long to await completion and the earth has yet much tosuffer, but we shall triumph and shall be Cæsars, and then we shall planthe universal happiness of man. But Thou mightest have taken even then thesword of Cæsar. Why didst Thou reject that last gift? Hadst Thou acceptedthat last counsel of the mighty spirit, Thou wouldst have accomplished allthat man seeks on earth—that is, some one to worship, some one to keep hisconscience, and some means of uniting all in one unanimous and harmoniousant‐heap, for the craving for universal unity is the third and lastanguish of men. Mankind as a whole has always striven to organize auniversal state. There have been many great nations with great histories,but the more highly they were developed the more unhappy they were, forthey felt more acutely than other people the craving for world‐wide union.The great conquerors, Timours and Ghenghis‐Khans, whirled like hurricanesover the face of the earth striving to subdue its people, and they toowere but the unconscious expression of the same craving for universalunity. Hadst Thou taken the world and Cæsar’s purple, Thou wouldst havefounded the universal state and have given universal peace. For who canrule men if not he who holds their conscience and their bread in hishands? We have taken the sword of Cæsar, and in taking it, of course, haverejected Thee and followed _him_. Oh, ages are yet to come of theconfusion of free thought, of their science and cannibalism. For havingbegun to build their tower of Babel without us, they will end, of course,with cannibalism. But then the beast will crawl to us and lick our feetand spatter them with tears of blood. And we shall sit upon the beast andraise the cup, and on it will be written, “Mystery.” But then, and onlythen, the reign of peace and happiness will come for men. Thou art proudof Thine elect, but Thou hast only the elect, while we give rest to all.And besides, how many of those elect, those mighty ones who could becomeelect, have grown weary waiting for Thee, and have transferred and willtransfer the powers of their spirit and the warmth of their heart to theother camp, and end by raising their _free_ banner against Thee. Thoudidst Thyself lift up that banner. But with us all will be happy and willno more rebel nor destroy one another as under Thy freedom. Oh, we shallpersuade them that they will only become free when they renounce theirfreedom to us and submit to us. And shall we be right or shall we belying? They will be convinced that we are right, for they will rememberthe horrors of slavery and confusion to which Thy freedom brought them.Freedom, free thought and science, will lead them into such straits andwill bring them face to face with such marvels and insoluble mysteries,that some of them, the fierce and rebellious, will destroy themselves,others, rebellious but weak, will destroy one another, while the rest,weak and unhappy, will crawl fawning to our feet and whine to us: “Yes,you were right, you alone possess His mystery, and we come back to you,save us from ourselves!”
“ ‘Receiving bread from us, they will see clearly that we take the breadmade by their hands from them, to give it to them, without any miracle.They will see that we do not change the stones to bread, but in truth theywill be more thankful for taking it from our hands than for the breaditself! For they will remember only too well that in old days, without ourhelp, even the bread they made turned to stones in their hands, whilesince they have come back to us, the very stones have turned to bread intheir hands. Too, too well will they know the value of completesubmission! And until men know that, they will be unhappy. Who is most toblame for their not knowing it?—speak! Who scattered the flock and sent itastray on unknown paths? But the flock will come together again and willsubmit once more, and then it will be once for all. Then we shall givethem the quiet humble happiness of weak creatures such as they are bynature. Oh, we shall persuade them at last not to be proud, for Thou didstlift them up and thereby taught them to be proud. We shall show them thatthey are weak, that they are only pitiful children, but that childlikehappiness is the sweetest of all. They will become timid and will look tous and huddle close to us in fear, as chicks to the hen. They will marvelat us and will be awe‐stricken before us, and will be proud at our beingso powerful and clever, that we have been able to subdue such a turbulentflock of thousands of millions. They will tremble impotently before ourwrath, their minds will grow fearful, they will be quick to shed tearslike women and children, but they will be just as ready at a sign from usto pass to laughter and rejoicing, to happy mirth and childish song. Yes,we shall set them to work, but in their leisure hours we shall make theirlife like a child’s game, with children’s songs and innocent dance. Oh, weshall allow them even sin, they are weak and helpless, and they will loveus like children because we allow them to sin. We shall tell them thatevery sin will be expiated, if it is done with our permission, that weallow them to sin because we love them, and the punishment for these sinswe take upon ourselves. And we shall take it upon ourselves, and they willadore us as their saviors who have taken on themselves their sins beforeGod. And they will have no secrets from us. We shall allow or forbid themto live with their wives and mistresses, to have or not to havechildren—according to whether they have been obedient or disobedient—andthey will submit to us gladly and cheerfully. The most painful secrets oftheir conscience, all, all they will bring to us, and we shall have ananswer for all. And they will be glad to believe our answer, for it willsave them from the great anxiety and terrible agony they endure at presentin making a free decision for themselves. And all will be happy, all themillions of creatures except the hundred thousand who rule over them. Foronly we, we who guard the mystery, shall be unhappy. There will bethousands of millions of happy babes, and a hundred thousand sufferers whohave taken upon themselves the curse of the knowledge of good and evil.Peacefully they will die, peacefully they will expire in Thy name, andbeyond the grave they will find nothing but death. But we shall keep thesecret, and for their happiness we shall allure them with the reward ofheaven and eternity. Though if there were anything in the other world, itcertainly would not be for such as they. It is prophesied that Thou wiltcome again in victory, Thou wilt come with Thy chosen, the proud andstrong, but we will say that they have only saved themselves, but we havesaved all. We are told that the harlot who sits upon the beast, and holdsin her hands the _mystery_, shall be put to shame, that the weak will riseup again, and will rend her royal purple and will strip naked herloathsome body. But then I will stand up and point out to Thee thethousand millions of happy children who have known no sin. And we who havetaken their sins upon us for their happiness will stand up before Thee andsay: “Judge us if Thou canst and darest.” Know that I fear Thee not. Knowthat I too have been in the wilderness, I too have lived on roots andlocusts, I too prized the freedom with which Thou hast blessed men, and Itoo was striving to stand among Thy elect, among the strong and powerful,thirsting “to make up the number.” But I awakened and would not servemadness. I turned back and joined the ranks of those _who have correctedThy work_. I left the proud and went back to the humble, for the happinessof the humble. What I say to Thee will come to pass, and our dominion willbe built up. I repeat, to‐morrow Thou shalt see that obedient flock who ata sign from me will hasten to heap up the hot cinders about the pile onwhich I shall burn Thee for coming to hinder us. For if any one has everdeserved our fires, it is Thou. To‐morrow I shall burn Thee. _Dixi._’ ”
Ivan stopped. He was carried away as he talked, and spoke with excitement;when he had finished, he suddenly smiled.
Alyosha had listened in silence; towards the end he was greatly moved andseemed several times on the point of interrupting, but restrained himself.Now his words came with a rush.
“But ... that’s absurd!” he cried, flushing. “Your poem is in praise ofJesus, not in blame of Him—as you meant it to be. And who will believe youabout freedom? Is that the way to understand it? That’s not the idea of itin the Orthodox Church.... That’s Rome, and not even the whole of Rome,it’s false—those are the worst of the Catholics, the Inquisitors, theJesuits!... And there could not be such a fantastic creature as yourInquisitor. What are these sins of mankind they take on themselves? Whoare these keepers of the mystery who have taken some curse upon themselvesfor the happiness of mankind? When have they been seen? We know theJesuits, they are spoken ill of, but surely they are not what youdescribe? They are not that at all, not at all.... They are simply theRomish army for the earthly sovereignty of the world in the future, withthe Pontiff of Rome for Emperor ... that’s their ideal, but there’s nosort of mystery or lofty melancholy about it.... It’s simple lust ofpower, of filthy earthly gain, of domination—something like a universalserfdom with them as masters—that’s all they stand for. They don’t evenbelieve in God perhaps. Your suffering Inquisitor is a mere fantasy.”
“Stay, stay,” laughed Ivan, “how hot you are! A fantasy you say, let it beso! Of course it’s a fantasy. But allow me to say: do you really thinkthat the Roman Catholic movement of the last centuries is actually nothingbut the lust of power, of filthy earthly gain? Is that Father Païssy’steaching?”
“No, no, on the contrary, Father Païssy did once say something rather thesame as you ... but of course it’s not the same, not a bit the same,”Alyosha hastily corrected himself.
“A precious admission, in spite of your ‘not a bit the same.’ I ask youwhy your Jesuits and Inquisitors have united simply for vile materialgain? Why can there not be among them one martyr oppressed by great sorrowand loving humanity? You see, only suppose that there was one such manamong all those who desire nothing but filthy material gain—if there’sonly one like my old Inquisitor, who had himself eaten roots in the desertand made frenzied efforts to subdue his flesh to make himself free andperfect. But yet all his life he loved humanity, and suddenly his eyeswere opened, and he saw that it is no great moral blessedness to attainperfection and freedom, if at the same time one gains the conviction thatmillions of God’s creatures have been created as a mockery, that they willnever be capable of using their freedom, that these poor rebels can neverturn into giants to complete the tower, that it was not for such geesethat the great idealist dreamt his dream of harmony. Seeing all that heturned back and joined—the clever people. Surely that could havehappened?”
“Joined whom, what clever people?” cried Alyosha, completely carried away.“They have no such great cleverness and no mysteries and secrets....Perhaps nothing but Atheism, that’s all their secret. Your Inquisitor doesnot believe in God, that’s his secret!”
“What if it is so! At last you have guessed it. It’s perfectly true, it’strue that that’s the whole secret, but isn’t that suffering, at least fora man like that, who has wasted his whole life in the desert and yet couldnot shake off his incurable love of humanity? In his old age he reachedthe clear conviction that nothing but the advice of the great dread spiritcould build up any tolerable sort of life for the feeble, unruly,‘incomplete, empirical creatures created in jest.’ And so, convinced ofthis, he sees that he must follow the counsel of the wise spirit, thedread spirit of death and destruction, and therefore accept lying anddeception, and lead men consciously to death and destruction, and yetdeceive them all the way so that they may not notice where they are beingled, that the poor blind creatures may at least on the way thinkthemselves happy. And note, the deception is in the name of Him in Whoseideal the old man had so fervently believed all his life long. Is not thattragic? And if only one such stood at the head of the whole army ‘filledwith the lust of power only for the sake of filthy gain’—would not onesuch be enough to make a tragedy? More than that, one such standing at thehead is enough to create the actual leading idea of the Roman Church withall its armies and Jesuits, its highest idea. I tell you frankly that Ifirmly believe that there has always been such a man among those who stoodat the head of the movement. Who knows, there may have been some such evenamong the Roman Popes. Who knows, perhaps the spirit of that accursed oldman who loves mankind so obstinately in his own way, is to be found evennow in a whole multitude of such old men, existing not by chance but byagreement, as a secret league formed long ago for the guarding of themystery, to guard it from the weak and the unhappy, so as to make themhappy. No doubt it is so, and so it must be indeed. I fancy that evenamong the Masons there’s something of the same mystery at the bottom, andthat that’s why the Catholics so detest the Masons as their rivalsbreaking up the unity of the idea, while it is so essential that thereshould be one flock and one shepherd.... But from the way I defend my ideaI might be an author impatient of your criticism. Enough of it.”
“You are perhaps a Mason yourself!” broke suddenly from Alyosha. “Youdon’t believe in God,” he added, speaking this time very sorrowfully. Hefancied besides that his brother was looking at him ironically. “How doesyour poem end?” he asked, suddenly looking down. “Or was it the end?”
“I meant to end it like this. When the Inquisitor ceased speaking hewaited some time for his Prisoner to answer him. His silence weighed downupon him. He saw that the Prisoner had listened intently all the time,looking gently in his face and evidently not wishing to reply. The old manlonged for Him to say something, however bitter and terrible. But Hesuddenly approached the old man in silence and softly kissed him on hisbloodless aged lips. That was all His answer. The old man shuddered. Hislips moved. He went to the door, opened it, and said to Him: ‘Go, and comeno more ... come not at all, never, never!’ And he let Him out into thedark alleys of the town. The Prisoner went away.”
“And the old man?”
“The kiss glows in his heart, but the old man adheres to his idea.”
“And you with him, you too?” cried Alyosha, mournfully.
Ivan laughed.
“Why, it’s all nonsense, Alyosha. It’s only a senseless poem of asenseless student, who could never write two lines of verse. Why do youtake it so seriously? Surely you don’t suppose I am going straight off tothe Jesuits, to join the men who are correcting His work? Good Lord, it’sno business of mine. I told you, all I want is to live on to thirty, andthen ... dash the cup to the ground!”
“But the little sticky leaves, and the precious tombs, and the blue sky,and the woman you love! How will you live, how will you love them?”Alyosha cried sorrowfully. “With such a hell in your heart and your head,how can you? No, that’s just what you are going away for, to join them ...if not, you will kill yourself, you can’t endure it!”
“There is a strength to endure everything,” Ivan said with a cold smile.
“What strength?”
“The strength of the Karamazovs—the strength of the Karamazov baseness.”
“To sink into debauchery, to stifle your soul with corruption, yes?”
“Possibly even that ... only perhaps till I am thirty I shall escape it,and then—”
“How will you escape it? By what will you escape it? That’s impossiblewith your ideas.”
“In the Karamazov way, again.”
“ ‘Everything is lawful,’ you mean? Everything is lawful, is that it?”
Ivan scowled, and all at once turned strangely pale.
“Ah, you’ve caught up yesterday’s phrase, which so offended Miüsov—andwhich Dmitri pounced upon so naïvely, and paraphrased!” he smiled queerly.“Yes, if you like, ‘everything is lawful’ since the word has been said. Iwon’t deny it. And Mitya’s version isn’t bad.”
Alyosha looked at him in silence.
“I thought that going away from here I have you at least,” Ivan saidsuddenly, with unexpected feeling; “but now I see that there is no placefor me even in your heart, my dear hermit. The formula, ‘all is lawful,’ Iwon’t renounce—will you renounce me for that, yes?”
Alyosha got up, went to him and softly kissed him on the lips.
“That’s plagiarism,” cried Ivan, highly delighted. “You stole that from mypoem. Thank you though. Get up, Alyosha, it’s time we were going, both ofus.”
They went out, but stopped when they reached the entrance of therestaurant.
“Listen, Alyosha,” Ivan began in a resolute voice, “if I am really able tocare for the sticky little leaves I shall only love them, remembering you.It’s enough for me that you are somewhere here, and I shan’t lose mydesire for life yet. Is that enough for you? Take it as a declaration oflove if you like. And now you go to the right and I to the left. And it’senough, do you hear, enough. I mean even if I don’t go away to‐morrow (Ithink I certainly shall go) and we meet again, don’t say a word more onthese subjects. I beg that particularly. And about Dmitri too, I ask youspecially, never speak to me again,” he added, with sudden irritation;“it’s all exhausted, it has all been said over and over again, hasn’t it?And I’ll make you one promise in return for it. When at thirty, I want to‘dash the cup to the ground,’ wherever I may be I’ll come to have one moretalk with you, even though it were from America, you may be sure of that.I’ll come on purpose. It will be very interesting to have a look at you,to see what you’ll be by that time. It’s rather a solemn promise, you see.And we really may be parting for seven years or ten. Come, go now to yourPater Seraphicus, he is dying. If he dies without you, you will be angrywith me for having kept you. Good‐by, kiss me once more; that’s right, nowgo.”
Ivan turned suddenly and went his way without looking back. It was just asDmitri had left Alyosha the day before, though the parting had been verydifferent. The strange resemblance flashed like an arrow through Alyosha’smind in the distress and dejection of that moment. He waited a little,looking after his brother. He suddenly noticed that Ivan swayed as hewalked and that his right shoulder looked lower than his left. He hadnever noticed it before. But all at once he turned too, and almost ran tothe monastery. It was nearly dark, and he felt almost frightened;something new was growing up in him for which he could not account. Thewind had risen again as on the previous evening, and the ancient pinesmurmured gloomily about him when he entered the hermitage copse. He almostran. “Pater Seraphicus—he got that name from somewhere—where from?”Alyosha wondered. “Ivan, poor Ivan, and when shall I see you again?...Here is the hermitage. Yes, yes, that he is, Pater Seraphicus, he willsave me—from him and for ever!”
Several times afterwards he wondered how he could on leaving Ivan socompletely forget his brother Dmitri, though he had that morning, only afew hours before, so firmly resolved to find him and not to give up doingso, even should he be unable to return to the monastery that night.


Chapter VI. For Awhile A Very Obscure One

And Ivan, on parting from Alyosha, went home to Fyodor Pavlovitch’s house.But, strange to say, he was overcome by insufferable depression, whichgrew greater at every step he took towards the house. There was nothingstrange in his being depressed; what was strange was that Ivan could nothave said what was the cause of it. He had often been depressed before,and there was nothing surprising at his feeling so at such a moment, whenhe had broken off with everything that had brought him here, and waspreparing that day to make a new start and enter upon a new, unknownfuture. He would again be as solitary as ever, and though he had greathopes, and great—too great—expectations from life, he could not have givenany definite account of his hopes, his expectations, or even his desires.
Yet at that moment, though the apprehension of the new and unknowncertainly found place in his heart, what was worrying him was somethingquite different. “Is it loathing for my father’s house?” he wondered.“Quite likely; I am so sick of it; and though it’s the last time I shallcross its hateful threshold, still I loathe it.... No, it’s not thateither. Is it the parting with Alyosha and the conversation I had withhim? For so many years I’ve been silent with the whole world and notdeigned to speak, and all of a sudden I reel off a rigmarole like that.”It certainly might have been the youthful vexation of youthfulinexperience and vanity—vexation at having failed to express himself,especially with such a being as Alyosha, on whom his heart had certainlybeen reckoning. No doubt that came in, that vexation, it must have doneindeed; but yet that was not it, that was not it either. “I feel sick withdepression and yet I can’t tell what I want. Better not think, perhaps.”
Ivan tried “not to think,” but that, too, was no use. What made hisdepression so vexatious and irritating was that it had a kind of casual,external character—he felt that. Some person or thing seemed to bestanding out somewhere, just as something will sometimes obtrude itselfupon the eye, and though one may be so busy with work or conversation thatfor a long time one does not notice it, yet it irritates and almosttorments one till at last one realizes, and removes the offending object,often quite a trifling and ridiculous one—some article left about in thewrong place, a handkerchief on the floor, a book not replaced on theshelf, and so on.
At last, feeling very cross and ill‐humored, Ivan arrived home, andsuddenly, about fifteen paces from the garden gate, he guessed what wasfretting and worrying him.
On a bench in the gateway the valet Smerdyakov was sitting enjoying thecoolness of the evening, and at the first glance at him Ivan knew that thevalet Smerdyakov was on his mind, and that it was this man that his soulloathed. It all dawned upon him suddenly and became clear. Just before,when Alyosha had been telling him of his meeting with Smerdyakov, he hadfelt a sudden twinge of gloom and loathing, which had immediately stirredresponsive anger in his heart. Afterwards, as he talked, Smerdyakov hadbeen forgotten for the time; but still he had been in his mind, and assoon as Ivan parted with Alyosha and was walking home, the forgottensensation began to obtrude itself again. “Is it possible that a miserable,contemptible creature like that can worry me so much?” he wondered, withinsufferable irritation.
It was true that Ivan had come of late to feel an intense dislike for theman, especially during the last few days. He had even begun to notice inhimself a growing feeling that was almost of hatred for the creature.Perhaps this hatred was accentuated by the fact that when Ivan first cameto the neighborhood he had felt quite differently. Then he had taken amarked interest in Smerdyakov, and had even thought him very original. Hehad encouraged him to talk to him, although he had always wondered at acertain incoherence, or rather restlessness, in his mind, and could notunderstand what it was that so continually and insistently worked upon thebrain of “the contemplative.” They discussed philosophical questions andeven how there could have been light on the first day when the sun, moon,and stars were only created on the fourth day, and how that was to beunderstood. But Ivan soon saw that, though the sun, moon, and stars mightbe an interesting subject, yet that it was quite secondary to Smerdyakov,and that he was looking for something altogether different. In one way andanother, he began to betray a boundless vanity, and a wounded vanity, too,and that Ivan disliked. It had first given rise to his aversion. Later on,there had been trouble in the house. Grushenka had come on the scene, andthere had been the scandals with his brother Dmitri—they discussed that,too. But though Smerdyakov always talked of that with great excitement, itwas impossible to discover what he desired to come of it. There was, infact, something surprising in the illogicality and incoherence of some ofhis desires, accidentally betrayed and always vaguely expressed.Smerdyakov was always inquiring, putting certain indirect but obviouslypremeditated questions, but what his object was he did not explain, andusually at the most important moment he would break off and relapse intosilence or pass to another subject. But what finally irritated Ivan mostand confirmed his dislike for him was the peculiar, revolting familiaritywhich Smerdyakov began to show more and more markedly. Not that he forgothimself and was rude; on the contrary, he always spoke very respectfully,yet he had obviously begun to consider—goodness knows why!—that there wassome sort of understanding between him and Ivan Fyodorovitch. He alwaysspoke in a tone that suggested that those two had some kind of compact,some secret between them, that had at some time been expressed on bothsides, only known to them and beyond the comprehension of those aroundthem. But for a long while Ivan did not recognize the real cause of hisgrowing dislike and he had only lately realized what was at the root ofit.
With a feeling of disgust and irritation he tried to pass in at the gatewithout speaking or looking at Smerdyakov. But Smerdyakov rose from thebench, and from that action alone, Ivan knew instantly that he wantedparticularly to talk to him. Ivan looked at him and stopped, and the factthat he did stop, instead of passing by, as he meant to the minute before,drove him to fury. With anger and repulsion he looked at Smerdyakov’semasculate, sickly face, with the little curls combed forward on hisforehead. His left eye winked and he grinned as if to say, “Where are yougoing? You won’t pass by; you see that we two clever people have somethingto say to each other.”
Ivan shook. “Get away, miserable idiot. What have I to do with you?” wason the tip of his tongue, but to his profound astonishment he heardhimself say, “Is my father still asleep, or has he waked?”
He asked the question softly and meekly, to his own surprise, and at once,again to his own surprise, sat down on the bench. For an instant he feltalmost frightened; he remembered it afterwards. Smerdyakov stood facinghim, his hands behind his back, looking at him with assurance and almostseverity.
“His honor is still asleep,” he articulated deliberately (“You were thefirst to speak, not I,” he seemed to say). “I am surprised at you, sir,”he added, after a pause, dropping his eyes affectedly, setting his rightfoot forward, and playing with the tip of his polished boot.
“Why are you surprised at me?” Ivan asked abruptly and sullenly, doing hisutmost to restrain himself, and suddenly realizing, with disgust, that hewas feeling intense curiosity and would not, on any account, have goneaway without satisfying it.
“Why don’t you go to Tchermashnya, sir?” Smerdyakov suddenly raised hiseyes and smiled familiarly. “Why I smile you must understand of yourself,if you are a clever man,” his screwed‐up left eye seemed to say.
“Why should I go to Tchermashnya?” Ivan asked in surprise.
Smerdyakov was silent again.
“Fyodor Pavlovitch himself has so begged you to,” he said at last, slowlyand apparently attaching no significance to his answer. “I put you offwith a secondary reason,” he seemed to suggest, “simply to say something.”
“Damn you! Speak out what you want!” Ivan cried angrily at last, passingfrom meekness to violence.
Smerdyakov drew his right foot up to his left, pulled himself up, butstill looked at him with the same serenity and the same little smile.
“Substantially nothing—but just by way of conversation.”
Another silence followed. They did not speak for nearly a minute. Ivanknew that he ought to get up and show anger, and Smerdyakov stood beforehim and seemed to be waiting as though to see whether he would be angry ornot. So at least it seemed to Ivan. At last he moved to get up. Smerdyakovseemed to seize the moment.
“I’m in an awful position, Ivan Fyodorovitch. I don’t know how to helpmyself,” he said resolutely and distinctly, and at his last word hesighed. Ivan Fyodorovitch sat down again.
“They are both utterly crazy, they are no better than little children,”Smerdyakov went on. “I am speaking of your parent and your brother DmitriFyodorovitch. Here Fyodor Pavlovitch will get up directly and beginworrying me every minute, ‘Has she come? Why hasn’t she come?’ and so onup till midnight and even after midnight. And if Agrafena Alexandrovnadoesn’t come (for very likely she does not mean to come at all) then hewill be at me again to‐morrow morning, ‘Why hasn’t she come? When will shecome?’—as though I were to blame for it. On the other side it’s no better.As soon as it gets dark, or even before, your brother will appear with hisgun in his hands: ‘Look out, you rogue, you soup‐maker. If you miss herand don’t let me know she’s been—I’ll kill you before any one.’ When thenight’s over, in the morning, he, too, like Fyodor Pavlovitch, beginsworrying me to death. ‘Why hasn’t she come? Will she come soon?’ And he,too, thinks me to blame because his lady hasn’t come. And every day andevery hour they get angrier and angrier, so that I sometimes think I shallkill myself in a fright. I can’t depend upon them, sir.”
“And why have you meddled? Why did you begin to spy for DmitriFyodorovitch?” said Ivan irritably.
“How could I help meddling? Though, indeed, I haven’t meddled at all, ifyou want to know the truth of the matter. I kept quiet from the verybeginning, not daring to answer; but he pitched on me to be his servant.He has had only one thing to say since: ‘I’ll kill you, you scoundrel, ifyou miss her,’ I feel certain, sir, that I shall have a long fit to‐morrow.”
“What do you mean by ‘a long fit’?”
“A long fit, lasting a long time—several hours, or perhaps a day or two.Once it went on for three days. I fell from the garret that time. Thestruggling ceased and then began again, and for three days I couldn’t comeback to my senses. Fyodor Pavlovitch sent for Herzenstube, the doctorhere, and he put ice on my head and tried another remedy, too.... I mighthave died.”
“But they say one can’t tell with epilepsy when a fit is coming. Whatmakes you say you will have one to‐morrow?” Ivan inquired, with apeculiar, irritable curiosity.
“That’s just so. You can’t tell beforehand.”
“Besides, you fell from the garret then.”
“I climb up to the garret every day. I might fall from the garret againto‐morrow. And, if not, I might fall down the cellar steps. I have to gointo the cellar every day, too.”
Ivan took a long look at him.
“You are talking nonsense, I see, and I don’t quite understand you,” hesaid softly, but with a sort of menace. “Do you mean to pretend to be illto‐morrow for three days, eh?”
Smerdyakov, who was looking at the ground again, and playing with the toeof his right foot, set the foot down, moved the left one forward, and,grinning, articulated:
“If I were able to play such a trick, that is, pretend to have a fit—andit would not be difficult for a man accustomed to them—I should have aperfect right to use such a means to save myself from death. For even ifAgrafena Alexandrovna comes to see his father while I am ill, his honorcan’t blame a sick man for not telling him. He’d be ashamed to.”
“Hang it all!” Ivan cried, his face working with anger, “why are youalways in such a funk for your life? All my brother Dmitri’s threats areonly hasty words and mean nothing. He won’t kill you; it’s not you he’llkill!”
“He’d kill me first of all, like a fly. But even more than that, I amafraid I shall be taken for an accomplice of his when he does somethingcrazy to his father.”
“Why should you be taken for an accomplice?”
“They’ll think I am an accomplice, because I let him know the signals as agreat secret.”
“What signals? Whom did you tell? Confound you, speak more plainly.”
“I’m bound to admit the fact,” Smerdyakov drawled with pedantic composure,“that I have a secret with Fyodor Pavlovitch in this business. As you knowyourself (if only you do know it) he has for several days past lockedhimself in as soon as night or even evening comes on. Of late you’ve beengoing upstairs to your room early every evening, and yesterday you did notcome down at all, and so perhaps you don’t know how carefully he has begunto lock himself in at night, and even if Grigory Vassilyevitch comes tothe door he won’t open to him till he hears his voice. But GrigoryVassilyevitch does not come, because I wait upon him alone in his roomnow. That’s the arrangement he made himself ever since this to‐do withAgrafena Alexandrovna began. But at night, by his orders, I go away to thelodge so that I don’t get to sleep till midnight, but am on the watch,getting up and walking about the yard, waiting for Agrafena Alexandrovnato come. For the last few days he’s been perfectly frantic expecting her.What he argues is, she is afraid of him, Dmitri Fyodorovitch (Mitya, as hecalls him), ‘and so,’ says he, ‘she’ll come the back‐way, late at night,to me. You look out for her,’ says he, ‘till midnight and later; and ifshe does come, you run up and knock at my door or at the window from thegarden. Knock at first twice, rather gently, and then three times morequickly, then,’ says he, ‘I shall understand at once that she has come,and will open the door to you quietly.’ Another signal he gave me in caseanything unexpected happens. At first, two knocks, and then, after aninterval, another much louder. Then he will understand that something hashappened suddenly and that I must see him, and he will open to me so thatI can go and speak to him. That’s all in case Agrafena Alexandrovna can’tcome herself, but sends a message. Besides, Dmitri Fyodorovitch mightcome, too, so I must let him know he is near. His honor is awfully afraidof Dmitri Fyodorovitch, so that even if Agrafena Alexandrovna had come andwere locked in with him, and Dmitri Fyodorovitch were to turn up anywherenear at the time, I should be bound to let him know at once, knockingthree times. So that the first signal of five knocks means AgrafenaAlexandrovna has come, while the second signal of three knocks means‘something important to tell you.’ His honor has shown me them severaltimes and explained them. And as in the whole universe no one knows ofthese signals but myself and his honor, so he’d open the door without theslightest hesitation and without calling out (he is awfully afraid ofcalling out aloud). Well, those signals are known to Dmitri Fyodorovitchtoo, now.”
“How are they known? Did you tell him? How dared you tell him?”
“It was through fright I did it. How could I dare to keep it back fromhim? Dmitri Fyodorovitch kept persisting every day, ‘You are deceiving me,you are hiding something from me! I’ll break both your legs for you.’ So Itold him those secret signals that he might see my slavish devotion, andmight be satisfied that I was not deceiving him, but was telling him all Icould.”
“If you think that he’ll make use of those signals and try to get in,don’t let him in.”
“But if I should be laid up with a fit, how can I prevent him coming inthen, even if I dared prevent him, knowing how desperate he is?”
“Hang it! How can you be so sure you are going to have a fit, confoundyou? Are you laughing at me?”
“How could I dare laugh at you? I am in no laughing humor with this fearon me. I feel I am going to have a fit. I have a presentiment. Frightalone will bring it on.”
“Confound it! If you are laid up, Grigory will be on the watch. LetGrigory know beforehand; he will be sure not to let him in.”
“I should never dare to tell Grigory Vassilyevitch about the signalswithout orders from my master. And as for Grigory Vassilyevitch hearinghim and not admitting him, he has been ill ever since yesterday, and MarfaIgnatyevna intends to give him medicine to‐morrow. They’ve just arrangedit. It’s a very strange remedy of hers. Marfa Ignatyevna knows of apreparation and always keeps it. It’s a strong thing made from some herb.She has the secret of it, and she always gives it to Grigory Vassilyevitchthree times a year when his lumbago’s so bad he is almost paralyzed by it.Then she takes a towel, wets it with the stuff, and rubs his whole backfor half an hour till it’s quite red and swollen, and what’s left in thebottle she gives him to drink with a special prayer; but not quite all,for on such occasions she leaves some for herself, and drinks it herself.And as they never take strong drink, I assure you they both drop asleep atonce and sleep sound a very long time. And when Grigory Vassilyevitchwakes up he is perfectly well after it, but Marfa Ignatyevna always has aheadache from it. So, if Marfa Ignatyevna carries out her intention to‐morrow, they won’t hear anything and hinder Dmitri Fyodorovitch. They’llbe asleep.”
“What a rigmarole! And it all seems to happen at once, as though it wereplanned. You’ll have a fit and they’ll both be unconscious,” cried Ivan.“But aren’t you trying to arrange it so?” broke from him suddenly, and hefrowned threateningly.
“How could I?... And why should I, when it all depends on DmitriFyodorovitch and his plans?... If he means to do anything, he’ll do it;but if not, I shan’t be thrusting him upon his father.”
“And why should he go to father, especially on the sly, if, as you sayyourself, Agrafena Alexandrovna won’t come at all?” Ivan went on, turningwhite with anger. “You say that yourself, and all the while I’ve beenhere, I’ve felt sure it was all the old man’s fancy, and the creaturewon’t come to him. Why should Dmitri break in on him if she doesn’t come?Speak, I want to know what you are thinking!”
“You know yourself why he’ll come. What’s the use of what I think? Hishonor will come simply because he is in a rage or suspicious on account ofmy illness perhaps, and he’ll dash in, as he did yesterday throughimpatience to search the rooms, to see whether she hasn’t escaped him onthe sly. He is perfectly well aware, too, that Fyodor Pavlovitch has a bigenvelope with three thousand roubles in it, tied up with ribbon and sealedwith three seals. On it is written in his own hand, ‘To my angelGrushenka, if she will come,’ to which he added three days later, ‘for mylittle chicken.’ There’s no knowing what that might do.”
“Nonsense!” cried Ivan, almost beside himself. “Dmitri won’t come to stealmoney and kill my father to do it. He might have killed him yesterday onaccount of Grushenka, like the frantic, savage fool he is, but he won’tsteal.”
“He is in very great need of money now—the greatest need, IvanFyodorovitch. You don’t know in what need he is,” Smerdyakov explained,with perfect composure and remarkable distinctness. “He looks on thatthree thousand as his own, too. He said so to me himself. ‘My father stillowes me just three thousand,’ he said. And besides that, consider, IvanFyodorovitch, there is something else perfectly true. It’s as good ascertain, so to say, that Agrafena Alexandrovna will force him, if only shecares to, to marry her—the master himself, I mean, Fyodor Pavlovitch—ifonly she cares to, and of course she may care to. All I’ve said is thatshe won’t come, but maybe she’s looking for more than that—I mean to bemistress here. I know myself that Samsonov, her merchant, was laughingwith her about it, telling her quite openly that it would not be at all astupid thing to do. And she’s got plenty of sense. She wouldn’t marry abeggar like Dmitri Fyodorovitch. So, taking that into consideration, IvanFyodorovitch, reflect that then neither Dmitri Fyodorovitch nor yourselfand your brother, Alexey Fyodorovitch, would have anything after themaster’s death, not a rouble, for Agrafena Alexandrovna would marry himsimply to get hold of the whole, all the money there is. But if yourfather were to die now, there’d be some forty thousand for sure, even forDmitri Fyodorovitch whom he hates so, for he’s made no will.... DmitriFyodorovitch knows all that very well.”
A sort of shudder passed over Ivan’s face. He suddenly flushed.
“Then why on earth,” he suddenly interrupted Smerdyakov, “do you advise meto go to Tchermashnya? What did you mean by that? If I go away, you seewhat will happen here.” Ivan drew his breath with difficulty.
“Precisely so,” said Smerdyakov, softly and reasonably, watching Ivanintently, however.
“What do you mean by ‘precisely so’?” Ivan questioned him, with a menacinglight in his eyes, restraining himself with difficulty.
“I spoke because I felt sorry for you. If I were in your place I shouldsimply throw it all up ... rather than stay on in such a position,”answered Smerdyakov, with the most candid air looking at Ivan’s flashingeyes. They were both silent.
“You seem to be a perfect idiot, and what’s more ... an awful scoundrel,too.” Ivan rose suddenly from the bench. He was about to pass straightthrough the gate, but he stopped short and turned to Smerdyakov. Somethingstrange followed. Ivan, in a sudden paroxysm, bit his lip, clenched hisfists, and, in another minute, would have flung himself on Smerdyakov. Thelatter, anyway, noticed it at the same moment, started, and shrank back.But the moment passed without mischief to Smerdyakov, and Ivan turned insilence, as it seemed in perplexity, to the gate.
“I am going away to Moscow to‐morrow, if you care to know—early to‐morrowmorning. That’s all!” he suddenly said aloud angrily, and wondered himselfafterwards what need there was to say this then to Smerdyakov.
“That’s the best thing you can do,” he responded, as though he hadexpected to hear it; “except that you can always be telegraphed for fromMoscow, if anything should happen here.”
Ivan stopped again, and again turned quickly to Smerdyakov. But a changehad passed over him, too. All his familiarity and carelessness hadcompletely disappeared. His face expressed attention and expectation,intent but timid and cringing.
“Haven’t you something more to say—something to add?” could be read in theintent gaze he fixed on Ivan.
“And couldn’t I be sent for from Tchermashnya, too—in case anythinghappened?” Ivan shouted suddenly, for some unknown reason raising hisvoice.
“From Tchermashnya, too ... you could be sent for,” Smerdyakov muttered,almost in a whisper, looking disconcerted, but gazing intently into Ivan’seyes.
“Only Moscow is farther and Tchermashnya is nearer. Is it to save myspending money on the fare, or to save my going so far out of my way, thatyou insist on Tchermashnya?”
“Precisely so ...” muttered Smerdyakov, with a breaking voice. He lookedat Ivan with a revolting smile, and again made ready to draw back. But tohis astonishment Ivan broke into a laugh, and went through the gate stilllaughing. Any one who had seen his face at that moment would have knownthat he was not laughing from lightness of heart, and he could not haveexplained himself what he was feeling at that instant. He moved and walkedas though in a nervous frenzy.


Chapter VII. “It’s Always Worth While Speaking To A Clever Man”

And in the same nervous frenzy, too, he spoke. Meeting Fyodor Pavlovitchin the drawing‐room directly he went in, he shouted to him, waving hishands, “I am going upstairs to my room, not in to you. Good‐by!” andpassed by, trying not even to look at his father. Very possibly the oldman was too hateful to him at that moment; but such an unceremoniousdisplay of hostility was a surprise even to Fyodor Pavlovitch. And the oldman evidently wanted to tell him something at once and had come to meethim in the drawing‐room on purpose. Receiving this amiable greeting, hestood still in silence and with an ironical air watched his son goingupstairs, till he passed out of sight.
“What’s the matter with him?” he promptly asked Smerdyakov, who hadfollowed Ivan.
“Angry about something. Who can tell?” the valet muttered evasively.
“Confound him! Let him be angry then. Bring in the samovar, and get alongwith you. Look sharp! No news?”
Then followed a series of questions such as Smerdyakov had just complainedof to Ivan, all relating to his expected visitor, and these questions wewill omit. Half an hour later the house was locked, and the crazy old manwas wandering along through the rooms in excited expectation of hearingevery minute the five knocks agreed upon. Now and then he peered out intothe darkness, seeing nothing.
It was very late, but Ivan was still awake and reflecting. He sat up latethat night, till two o’clock. But we will not give an account of histhoughts, and this is not the place to look into that soul—its turn willcome. And even if one tried, it would be very hard to give an account ofthem, for there were no thoughts in his brain, but something very vague,and, above all, intense excitement. He felt himself that he had lost hisbearings. He was fretted, too, by all sorts of strange and almostsurprising desires; for instance, after midnight he suddenly had anintense irresistible inclination to go down, open the door, go to thelodge and beat Smerdyakov. But if he had been asked why, he could not havegiven any exact reason, except perhaps that he loathed the valet as onewho had insulted him more gravely than any one in the world. On the otherhand, he was more than once that night overcome by a sort of inexplicablehumiliating terror, which he felt positively paralyzed his physicalpowers. His head ached and he was giddy. A feeling of hatred was ranklingin his heart, as though he meant to avenge himself on some one. He evenhated Alyosha, recalling the conversation he had just had with him. Atmoments he hated himself intensely. Of Katerina Ivanovna he almost forgotto think, and wondered greatly at this afterwards, especially as heremembered perfectly that when he had protested so valiantly to KaterinaIvanovna that he would go away next day to Moscow, something had whisperedin his heart, “That’s nonsense, you are not going, and it won’t be so easyto tear yourself away as you are boasting now.”
Remembering that night long afterwards, Ivan recalled with peculiarrepulsion how he had suddenly got up from the sofa and had stealthily, asthough he were afraid of being watched, opened the door, gone out on thestaircase and listened to Fyodor Pavlovitch stirring down below, hadlistened a long while—some five minutes—with a sort of strange curiosity,holding his breath while his heart throbbed. And why he had done all this,why he was listening, he could not have said. That “action” all his lifeafterwards he called “infamous,” and at the bottom of his heart, hethought of it as the basest action of his life. For Fyodor Pavlovitchhimself he felt no hatred at that moment, but was simply intensely curiousto know how he was walking down there below and what he must be doing now.He wondered and imagined how he must be peeping out of the dark windowsand stopping in the middle of the room, listening, listening—for some oneto knock. Ivan went out on to the stairs twice to listen like this.
About two o’clock when everything was quiet, and even Fyodor Pavlovitchhad gone to bed, Ivan had got into bed, firmly resolved to fall asleep atonce, as he felt fearfully exhausted. And he did fall asleep at once, andslept soundly without dreams, but waked early, at seven o’clock, when itwas broad daylight. Opening his eyes, he was surprised to feel himselfextraordinarily vigorous. He jumped up at once and dressed quickly; thendragged out his trunk and began packing immediately. His linen had comeback from the laundress the previous morning. Ivan positively smiled atthe thought that everything was helping his sudden departure. And hisdeparture certainly was sudden. Though Ivan had said the day before (toKaterina Ivanovna, Alyosha, and Smerdyakov) that he was leaving next day,yet he remembered that he had no thought of departure when he went to bed,or, at least, had not dreamed that his first act in the morning would beto pack his trunk. At last his trunk and bag were ready. It was about nineo’clock when Marfa Ignatyevna came in with her usual inquiry, “Where willyour honor take your tea, in your own room or downstairs?” He lookedalmost cheerful, but there was about him, about his words and gestures,something hurried and scattered. Greeting his father affably, and eveninquiring specially after his health, though he did not wait to hear hisanswer to the end, he announced that he was starting off in an hour toreturn to Moscow for good, and begged him to send for the horses. Hisfather heard this announcement with no sign of surprise, and forgot in anunmannerly way to show regret at losing him. Instead of doing so, he flewinto a great flutter at the recollection of some important business of hisown.
“What a fellow you are! Not to tell me yesterday! Never mind; we’ll manageit all the same. Do me a great service, my dear boy. Go to Tchermashnya onthe way. It’s only to turn to the left from the station at Volovya, onlyanother twelve versts and you come to Tchermashnya.”
“I’m sorry, I can’t. It’s eighty versts to the railway and the trainstarts for Moscow at seven o’clock to‐night. I can only just catch it.”
“You’ll catch it to‐morrow or the day after, but to‐day turn off toTchermashnya. It won’t put you out much to humor your father! If I hadn’thad something to keep me here, I would have run over myself long ago, forI’ve some business there in a hurry. But here I ... it’s not the time forme to go now.... You see, I’ve two pieces of copse land there. TheMaslovs, an old merchant and his son, will give eight thousand for thetimber. But last year I just missed a purchaser who would have giventwelve. There’s no getting any one about here to buy it. The Maslovs haveit all their own way. One has to take what they’ll give, for no one heredare bid against them. The priest at Ilyinskoe wrote to me last Thursdaythat a merchant called Gorstkin, a man I know, had turned up. What makeshim valuable is that he is not from these parts, so he is not afraid ofthe Maslovs. He says he will give me eleven thousand for the copse. Do youhear? But he’ll only be here, the priest writes, for a week altogether, soyou must go at once and make a bargain with him.”
“Well, you write to the priest; he’ll make the bargain.”
“He can’t do it. He has no eye for business. He is a perfect treasure, I’dgive him twenty thousand to take care of for me without a receipt; but hehas no eye for business, he is a perfect child, a crow could deceive him.And yet he is a learned man, would you believe it? This Gorstkin lookslike a peasant, he wears a blue kaftan, but he is a regular rogue. That’sthe common complaint. He is a liar. Sometimes he tells such lies that youwonder why he is doing it. He told me the year before last that his wifewas dead and that he had married another, and would you believe it, therewas not a word of truth in it? His wife has never died at all, she isalive to this day and gives him a beating twice a week. So what you haveto find out is whether he is lying or speaking the truth, when he says hewants to buy it and would give eleven thousand.”
“I shall be no use in such a business. I have no eye either.”
“Stay, wait a bit! You will be of use, for I will tell you the signs bywhich you can judge about Gorstkin. I’ve done business with him a longtime. You see, you must watch his beard; he has a nasty, thin, red beard.If his beard shakes when he talks and he gets cross, it’s all right, he issaying what he means, he wants to do business. But if he strokes his beardwith his left hand and grins—he is trying to cheat you. Don’t watch hiseyes, you won’t find out anything from his eyes, he is a deep one, arogue—but watch his beard! I’ll give you a note and you show it to him.He’s called Gorstkin, though his real name is Lyagavy; but don’t callhim so, he will be offended. If you come to an understanding with him, andsee it’s all right, write here at once. You need only write: ‘He’s notlying.’ Stand out for eleven thousand; one thousand you can knock off, butnot more. Just think! there’s a difference between eight thousand andeleven thousand. It’s as good as picking up three thousand; it’s not soeasy to find a purchaser, and I’m in desperate need of money. Only let meknow it’s serious, and I’ll run over and fix it up. I’ll snatch the timesomehow. But what’s the good of my galloping over, if it’s all a notion ofthe priest’s? Come, will you go?”
“Oh, I can’t spare the time. You must excuse me.”
“Come, you might oblige your father. I shan’t forget it. You’ve no heart,any of you—that’s what it is? What’s a day or two to you? Where are yougoing now—to Venice? Your Venice will keep another two days. I would havesent Alyosha, but what use is Alyosha in a thing like that? I send youjust because you are a clever fellow. Do you suppose I don’t see that? Youknow nothing about timber, but you’ve got an eye. All that is wanted is tosee whether the man is in earnest. I tell you, watch his beard—if hisbeard shakes you know he is in earnest.”
“You force me to go to that damned Tchermashnya yourself, then?” criedIvan, with a malignant smile.
Fyodor Pavlovitch did not catch, or would not catch, the malignancy, buthe caught the smile.
“Then you’ll go, you’ll go? I’ll scribble the note for you at once.”
“I don’t know whether I shall go. I don’t know. I’ll decide on the way.”
“Nonsense! Decide at once. My dear fellow, decide! If you settle thematter, write me a line; give it to the priest and he’ll send it on to meat once. And I won’t delay you more than that. You can go to Venice. Thepriest will give you horses back to Volovya station.”
The old man was quite delighted. He wrote the note, and sent for thehorses. A light lunch was brought in, with brandy. When Fyodor Pavlovitchwas pleased, he usually became expansive, but to‐day he seemed to restrainhimself. Of Dmitri, for instance, he did not say a word. He was quiteunmoved by the parting, and seemed, in fact, at a loss for something tosay. Ivan noticed this particularly. “He must be bored with me,” hethought. Only when accompanying his son out on to the steps, the old manbegan to fuss about. He would have kissed him, but Ivan made haste to holdout his hand, obviously avoiding the kiss. His father saw it at once, andinstantly pulled himself up.
“Well, good luck to you, good luck to you!” he repeated from the steps.“You’ll come again some time or other? Mind you do come. I shall always beglad to see you. Well, Christ be with you!”
Ivan got into the carriage.
“Good‐by, Ivan! Don’t be too hard on me!” the father called for the lasttime.
The whole household came out to take leave—Smerdyakov, Marfa and Grigory.Ivan gave them ten roubles each. When he had seated himself in thecarriage, Smerdyakov jumped up to arrange the rug.
“You see ... I am going to Tchermashnya,” broke suddenly from Ivan. Again,as the day before, the words seemed to drop of themselves, and he laughed,too, a peculiar, nervous laugh. He remembered it long after.
“It’s a true saying then, that ‘it’s always worth while speaking to aclever man,’ ” answered Smerdyakov firmly, looking significantly at Ivan.
The carriage rolled away. Nothing was clear in Ivan’s soul, but he lookedeagerly around him at the fields, at the hills, at the trees, at a flockof geese flying high overhead in the bright sky. And all of a sudden hefelt very happy. He tried to talk to the driver, and he felt intenselyinterested in an answer the peasant made him; but a minute later herealized that he was not catching anything, and that he had not reallyeven taken in the peasant’s answer. He was silent, and it was pleasanteven so. The air was fresh, pure and cool, the sky bright. The images ofAlyosha and Katerina Ivanovna floated into his mind. But he softly smiled,blew softly on the friendly phantoms, and they flew away. “There’s plentyof time for them,” he thought. They reached the station quickly, changedhorses, and galloped to Volovya. “Why is it worth while speaking to aclever man? What did he mean by that?” The thought seemed suddenly toclutch at his breathing. “And why did I tell him I was going toTchermashnya?” They reached Volovya station. Ivan got out of the carriage,and the drivers stood round him bargaining over the journey of twelveversts to Tchermashnya. He told them to harness the horses. He went intothe station house, looked round, glanced at the overseer’s wife, andsuddenly went back to the entrance.
“I won’t go to Tchermashnya. Am I too late to reach the railway by seven,brothers?”
“We shall just do it. Shall we get the carriage out?”
“At once. Will any one of you be going to the town to‐morrow?”
“To be sure. Mitri here will.”
“Can you do me a service, Mitri? Go to my father’s, to Fyodor PavlovitchKaramazov, and tell him I haven’t gone to Tchermashnya. Can you?”
“Of course I can. I’ve known Fyodor Pavlovitch a long time.”
“And here’s something for you, for I dare say he won’t give you anything,”said Ivan, laughing gayly.
“You may depend on it he won’t.” Mitya laughed too. “Thank you, sir. I’llbe sure to do it.”
At seven o’clock Ivan got into the train and set off to Moscow “Away withthe past. I’ve done with the old world for ever, and may I have no news,no echo, from it. To a new life, new places and no looking back!” Butinstead of delight his soul was filled with such gloom, and his heartached with such anguish, as he had never known in his life before. He wasthinking all the night. The train flew on, and only at daybreak, when hewas approaching Moscow, he suddenly roused himself from his meditation.
“I am a scoundrel,” he whispered to himself.
Fyodor Pavlovitch remained well satisfied at having seen his son off. Fortwo hours afterwards he felt almost happy, and sat drinking brandy. Butsuddenly something happened which was very annoying and unpleasant forevery one in the house, and completely upset Fyodor Pavlovitch’sequanimity at once. Smerdyakov went to the cellar for something and felldown from the top of the steps. Fortunately, Marfa Ignatyevna was in theyard and heard him in time. She did not see the fall, but heard hisscream—the strange, peculiar scream, long familiar to her—the scream ofthe epileptic falling in a fit. They could not tell whether the fit hadcome on him at the moment he was descending the steps, so that he musthave fallen unconscious, or whether it was the fall and the shock that hadcaused the fit in Smerdyakov, who was known to be liable to them. Theyfound him at the bottom of the cellar steps, writhing in convulsions andfoaming at the mouth. It was thought at first that he must have brokensomething—an arm or a leg—and hurt himself, but “God had preserved him,”as Marfa Ignatyevna expressed it—nothing of the kind had happened. But itwas difficult to get him out of the cellar. They asked the neighbors tohelp and managed it somehow. Fyodor Pavlovitch himself was present at thewhole ceremony. He helped, evidently alarmed and upset. The sick man didnot regain consciousness; the convulsions ceased for a time, but thenbegan again, and every one concluded that the same thing would happen, ashad happened a year before, when he accidentally fell from the garret.They remembered that ice had been put on his head then. There was stillice in the cellar, and Marfa Ignatyevna had some brought up. In theevening, Fyodor Pavlovitch sent for Doctor Herzenstube, who arrived atonce. He was a most estimable old man, and the most careful andconscientious doctor in the province. After careful examination, heconcluded that the fit was a very violent one and might have seriousconsequences; that meanwhile he, Herzenstube, did not fully understand it,but that by to‐morrow morning, if the present remedies were unavailing, hewould venture to try something else. The invalid was taken to the lodge,to a room next to Grigory’s and Marfa Ignatyevna’s.
Then Fyodor Pavlovitch had one misfortune after another to put up withthat day. Marfa Ignatyevna cooked the dinner, and the soup, compared withSmerdyakov’s, was “no better than dish‐water,” and the fowl was so driedup that it was impossible to masticate it. To her master’s bitter, thoughdeserved, reproaches, Marfa Ignatyevna replied that the fowl was a veryold one to begin with, and that she had never been trained as a cook. Inthe evening there was another trouble in store for Fyodor Pavlovitch; hewas informed that Grigory, who had not been well for the last three days,was completely laid up by his lumbago. Fyodor Pavlovitch finished his teaas early as possible and locked himself up alone in the house. He was interrible excitement and suspense. That evening he reckoned on Grushenka’scoming almost as a certainty. He had received from Smerdyakov that morningan assurance “that she had promised to come without fail.” Theincorrigible old man’s heart throbbed with excitement; he paced up anddown his empty rooms listening. He had to be on the alert. Dmitri might beon the watch for her somewhere, and when she knocked on the window(Smerdyakov had informed him two days before that he had told her whereand how to knock) the door must be opened at once. She must not be asecond in the passage, for fear—which God forbid!—that she should befrightened and run away. Fyodor Pavlovitch had much to think of, but neverhad his heart been steeped in such voluptuous hopes. This time he couldsay almost certainly that she would come!



Book VI. The Russian Monk


Chapter I. Father Zossima And His Visitors

When with an anxious and aching heart Alyosha went into his elder’s cell,he stood still almost astonished. Instead of a sick man at his last gasp,perhaps unconscious, as he had feared to find him, he saw him sitting upin his chair and, though weak and exhausted, his face was bright andcheerful, he was surrounded by visitors and engaged in a quiet and joyfulconversation. But he had only got up from his bed a quarter of an hourbefore Alyosha’s arrival; his visitors had gathered together in his cellearlier, waiting for him to wake, having received a most confidentassurance from Father Païssy that “the teacher would get up, and as he hadhimself promised in the morning, converse once more with those dear to hisheart.” This promise and indeed every word of the dying elder FatherPaïssy put implicit trust in. If he had seen him unconscious, if he hadseen him breathe his last, and yet had his promise that he would rise upand say good‐by to him, he would not have believed perhaps even in death,but would still have expected the dead man to recover and fulfill hispromise. In the morning as he lay down to sleep, Father Zossima had toldhim positively: “I shall not die without the delight of anotherconversation with you, beloved of my heart. I shall look once more on yourdear face and pour out my heart to you once again.” The monks, who hadgathered for this probably last conversation with Father Zossima, had allbeen his devoted friends for many years. There were four of them: FatherIosif and Father Païssy, Father Mihaïl, the warden of the hermitage, a mannot very old and far from being learned. He was of humble origin, ofstrong will and steadfast faith, of austere appearance, but of deeptenderness, though he obviously concealed it as though he were almostashamed of it. The fourth, Father Anfim, was a very old and humble littlemonk of the poorest peasant class. He was almost illiterate, and veryquiet, scarcely speaking to any one. He was the humblest of the humble,and looked as though he had been frightened by something great and awfulbeyond the scope of his intelligence. Father Zossima had a great affectionfor this timorous man, and always treated him with marked respect, thoughperhaps there was no one he had known to whom he had said less, in spiteof the fact that he had spent years wandering about holy Russia with him.That was very long ago, forty years before, when Father Zossima firstbegan his life as a monk in a poor and little monastery at Kostroma, andwhen, shortly after, he had accompanied Father Anfim on his pilgrimage tocollect alms for their poor monastery.
The whole party were in the bedroom which, as we mentioned before, wasvery small, so that there was scarcely room for the four of them (inaddition to Porfiry, the novice, who stood) to sit round Father Zossima onchairs brought from the sitting‐room. It was already beginning to getdark, the room was lighted up by the lamps and the candles before theikons.
Seeing Alyosha standing embarrassed in the doorway, Father Zossima smiledat him joyfully and held out his hand.
“Welcome, my quiet one, welcome, my dear, here you are too. I knew youwould come.”
Alyosha went up to him, bowed down before him to the ground and wept.Something surged up from his heart, his soul was quivering, he wanted tosob.
“Come, don’t weep over me yet,” Father Zossima smiled, laying his righthand on his head. “You see I am sitting up talking; maybe I shall liveanother twenty years yet, as that dear good woman from Vishegorye, withher little Lizaveta in her arms, wished me yesterday. God bless the motherand the little girl Lizaveta,” he crossed himself. “Porfiry, did you takeher offering where I told you?”
He meant the sixty copecks brought him the day before by the good‐humoredwoman to be given “to some one poorer than me.” Such offerings, always ofmoney gained by personal toil, are made by way of penance voluntarilyundertaken. The elder had sent Porfiry the evening before to a widow,whose house had been burnt down lately, and who after the fire had gonewith her children begging alms. Porfiry hastened to reply that he hadgiven the money, as he had been instructed, “from an unknownbenefactress.”
“Get up, my dear boy,” the elder went on to Alyosha. “Let me look at you.Have you been home and seen your brother?” It seemed strange to Alyoshathat he asked so confidently and precisely, about one of his brothersonly—but which one? Then perhaps he had sent him out both yesterday andto‐day for the sake of that brother.
“I have seen one of my brothers,” answered Alyosha.
“I mean the elder one, to whom I bowed down.”
“I only saw him yesterday and could not find him to‐day,” said Alyosha.
“Make haste to find him, go again to‐morrow and make haste, leaveeverything and make haste. Perhaps you may still have time to preventsomething terrible. I bowed down yesterday to the great suffering in storefor him.”
He was suddenly silent and seemed to be pondering. The words were strange.Father Iosif, who had witnessed the scene yesterday, exchanged glanceswith Father Païssy. Alyosha could not resist asking:
“Father and teacher,” he began with extreme emotion, “your words are tooobscure.... What is this suffering in store for him?”
“Don’t inquire. I seemed to see something terrible yesterday ... as thoughhis whole future were expressed in his eyes. A look came into his eyes—sothat I was instantly horror‐stricken at what that man is preparing forhimself. Once or twice in my life I’ve seen such a look in a man’s face... reflecting as it were his future fate, and that fate, alas, came topass. I sent you to him, Alexey, for I thought your brotherly face wouldhelp him. But everything and all our fates are from the Lord. ‘Except acorn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone; but if itdie, it bringeth forth much fruit.’ Remember that. You, Alexey, I’ve manytimes silently blessed for your face, know that,” added the elder with agentle smile. “This is what I think of you, you will go forth from thesewalls, but will live like a monk in the world. You will have many enemies,but even your foes will love you. Life will bring you many misfortunes,but you will find your happiness in them, and will bless life and willmake others bless it—which is what matters most. Well, that is yourcharacter. Fathers and teachers,” he addressed his friends with a tendersmile, “I have never till to‐day told even him why the face of this youthis so dear to me. Now I will tell you. His face has been as it were aremembrance and a prophecy for me. At the dawn of my life when I was achild I had an elder brother who died before my eyes at seventeen. Andlater on in the course of my life I gradually became convinced that thatbrother had been for a guidance and a sign from on high for me. For had henot come into my life, I should never perhaps, so I fancy at least, havebecome a monk and entered on this precious path. He appeared first to mein my childhood, and here, at the end of my pilgrimage, he seems to havecome to me over again. It is marvelous, fathers and teachers, that Alexey,who has some, though not a great, resemblance in face, seems to me so likehim spiritually, that many times I have taken him for that young man, mybrother, mysteriously come back to me at the end of my pilgrimage, as areminder and an inspiration. So that I positively wondered at so strange adream in myself. Do you hear this, Porfiry?” he turned to the novice whowaited on him. “Many times I’ve seen in your face as it were a look ofmortification that I love Alexey more than you. Now you know why that wasso, but I love you too, know that, and many times I grieved at yourmortification. I should like to tell you, dear friends, of that youth, mybrother, for there has been no presence in my life more precious, moresignificant and touching. My heart is full of tenderness, and I look at mywhole life at this moment as though living through it again.”
                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
Here I must observe that this last conversation of Father Zossima with thefriends who visited him on the last day of his life has been partlypreserved in writing. Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov wrote it down frommemory, some time after his elder’s death. But whether this was only theconversation that took place then, or whether he added to it his notes ofparts of former conversations with his teacher, I cannot determine. In hisaccount, Father Zossima’s talk goes on without interruption, as though hetold his life to his friends in the form of a story, though there is nodoubt, from other accounts of it, that the conversation that evening wasgeneral. Though the guests did not interrupt Father Zossima much, yet theytoo talked, perhaps even told something themselves. Besides, FatherZossima could not have carried on an uninterrupted narrative, for he wassometimes gasping for breath, his voice failed him, and he even lay downto rest on his bed, though he did not fall asleep and his visitors did notleave their seats. Once or twice the conversation was interrupted byFather Païssy’s reading the Gospel. It is worthy of note, too, that no oneof them supposed that he would die that night, for on that evening of hislife after his deep sleep in the day he seemed suddenly to have found newstrength, which kept him up through this long conversation. It was like alast effort of love which gave him marvelous energy; only for a littletime, however, for his life was cut short immediately.... But of thatlater. I will only add now that I have preferred to confine myself to theaccount given by Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov. It will be shorter and notso fatiguing, though of course, as I must repeat, Alyosha took a greatdeal from previous conversations and added them to it.
                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
Notes of the Life of the deceased Priest and Monk, the Elder Zossima,taken from his own words by Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov.
BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES
_(a)_ _Father Zossima’s Brother_
Beloved fathers and teachers, I was born in a distant province in thenorth, in the town of V. My father was a gentleman by birth, but of nogreat consequence or position. He died when I was only two years old, andI don’t remember him at all. He left my mother a small house built ofwood, and a fortune, not large, but sufficient to keep her and herchildren in comfort. There were two of us, my elder brother Markel and I.He was eight years older than I was, of hasty irritable temperament, butkind‐hearted and never ironical. He was remarkably silent, especially athome with me, his mother, and the servants. He did well at school, but didnot get on with his schoolfellows, though he never quarreled, at least somy mother has told me. Six months before his death, when he was seventeen,he made friends with a political exile who had been banished from Moscowto our town for freethinking, and led a solitary existence there. He was agood scholar who had gained distinction in philosophy in the university.Something made him take a fancy to Markel, and he used to ask him to seehim. The young man would spend whole evenings with him during that winter,till the exile was summoned to Petersburg to take up his post again at hisown request, as he had powerful friends.
It was the beginning of Lent, and Markel would not fast, he was rude andlaughed at it. “That’s all silly twaddle, and there is no God,” he said,horrifying my mother, the servants, and me too. For though I was onlynine, I too was aghast at hearing such words. We had four servants, allserfs. I remember my mother selling one of the four, the cook Afimya, whowas lame and elderly, for sixty paper roubles, and hiring a free servantto take her place.
In the sixth week in Lent, my brother, who was never strong and had atendency to consumption, was taken ill. He was tall but thin and delicate‐looking, and of very pleasing countenance. I suppose he caught cold,anyway the doctor, who came, soon whispered to my mother that it wasgalloping consumption, that he would not live through the spring. Mymother began weeping, and, careful not to alarm my brother, she entreatedhim to go to church, to confess and take the sacrament, as he was stillable to move about. This made him angry, and he said something profaneabout the church. He grew thoughtful, however; he guessed at once that hewas seriously ill, and that that was why his mother was begging him toconfess and take the sacrament. He had been aware, indeed, for a long timepast, that he was far from well, and had a year before coolly observed atdinner to our mother and me, “My life won’t be long among you, I may notlive another year,” which seemed now like a prophecy.
Three days passed and Holy Week had come. And on Tuesday morning mybrother began going to church. “I am doing this simply for your sake,mother, to please and comfort you,” he said. My mother wept with joy andgrief. “His end must be near,” she thought, “if there’s such a change inhim.” But he was not able to go to church long, he took to his bed, so hehad to confess and take the sacrament at home.
It was a late Easter, and the days were bright, fine, and full offragrance. I remember he used to cough all night and sleep badly, but inthe morning he dressed and tried to sit up in an arm‐chair. That’s how Iremember him sitting, sweet and gentle, smiling, his face bright andjoyous, in spite of his illness. A marvelous change passed over him, hisspirit seemed transformed. The old nurse would come in and say, “Let melight the lamp before the holy image, my dear.” And once he would not haveallowed it and would have blown it out.
“Light it, light it, dear, I was a wretch to have prevented you doing it.You are praying when you light the lamp, and I am praying when I rejoiceseeing you. So we are praying to the same God.”
Those words seemed strange to us, and mother would go to her room andweep, but when she went in to him she wiped her eyes and looked cheerful.“Mother, don’t weep, darling,” he would say, “I’ve long to live yet, longto rejoice with you, and life is glad and joyful.”
“Ah, dear boy, how can you talk of joy when you lie feverish at night,coughing as though you would tear yourself to pieces.”
“Don’t cry, mother,” he would answer, “life is paradise, and we are all inparadise, but we won’t see it, if we would, we should have heaven on earththe next day.”
Every one wondered at his words, he spoke so strangely and positively; wewere all touched and wept. Friends came to see us. “Dear ones,” he wouldsay to them, “what have I done that you should love me so, how can youlove any one like me, and how was it I did not know, I did not appreciateit before?”
When the servants came in to him he would say continually, “Dear, kindpeople, why are you doing so much for me, do I deserve to be waited on? Ifit were God’s will for me to live, I would wait on you, for all men shouldwait on one another.”
Mother shook her head as she listened. “My darling, it’s your illnessmakes you talk like that.”
“Mother, darling,” he would say, “there must be servants and masters, butif so I will be the servant of my servants, the same as they are to me.And another thing, mother, every one of us has sinned against all men, andI more than any.”
Mother positively smiled at that, smiled through her tears. “Why, howcould you have sinned against all men, more than all? Robbers andmurderers have done that, but what sin have you committed yet, that youhold yourself more guilty than all?”
“Mother, little heart of mine,” he said (he had begun using such strangecaressing words at that time), “little heart of mine, my joy, believe me,every one is really responsible to all men for all men and for everything.I don’t know how to explain it to you, but I feel it is so, painfullyeven. And how is it we went on then living, getting angry and notknowing?”
So he would get up every day, more and more sweet and joyous and full oflove. When the doctor, an old German called Eisenschmidt, came:
“Well, doctor, have I another day in this world?” he would ask, joking.
“You’ll live many days yet,” the doctor would answer, “and months andyears too.”
“Months and years!” he would exclaim. “Why reckon the days? One day isenough for a man to know all happiness. My dear ones, why do we quarrel,try to outshine each other and keep grudges against each other? Let’s gostraight into the garden, walk and play there, love, appreciate, and kisseach other, and glorify life.”
“Your son cannot last long,” the doctor told my mother, as she accompaniedhim to the door. “The disease is affecting his brain.”
The windows of his room looked out into the garden, and our garden was ashady one, with old trees in it which were coming into bud. The firstbirds of spring were flitting in the branches, chirruping and singing atthe windows. And looking at them and admiring them, he began suddenlybegging their forgiveness too: “Birds of heaven, happy birds, forgive me,for I have sinned against you too.” None of us could understand that atthe time, but he shed tears of joy. “Yes,” he said, “there was such aglory of God all about me: birds, trees, meadows, sky; only I lived inshame and dishonored it all and did not notice the beauty and glory.”
“You take too many sins on yourself,” mother used to say, weeping.
“Mother, darling, it’s for joy, not for grief I am crying. Though I can’texplain it to you, I like to humble myself before them, for I don’t knowhow to love them enough. If I have sinned against every one, yet allforgive me, too, and that’s heaven. Am I not in heaven now?”
And there was a great deal more I don’t remember. I remember I went onceinto his room when there was no one else there. It was a bright evening,the sun was setting, and the whole room was lighted up. He beckoned me,and I went up to him. He put his hands on my shoulders and looked into myface tenderly, lovingly; he said nothing for a minute, only looked at melike that.
“Well,” he said, “run and play now, enjoy life for me too.”
I went out then and ran to play. And many times in my life afterwards Iremembered even with tears how he told me to enjoy life for him too. Therewere many other marvelous and beautiful sayings of his, though we did notunderstand them at the time. He died the third week after Easter. He wasfully conscious though he could not talk; up to his last hour he did notchange. He looked happy, his eyes beamed and sought us, he smiled at us,beckoned us. There was a great deal of talk even in the town about hisdeath. I was impressed by all this at the time, but not too much so,though I cried a good deal at his funeral. I was young then, a child, buta lasting impression, a hidden feeling of it all, remained in my heart,ready to rise up and respond when the time came. So indeed it happened.
_(b) Of the Holy Scriptures in the Life of Father Zossima_
I was left alone with my mother. Her friends began advising her to send meto Petersburg as other parents did. “You have only one son now,” theysaid, “and have a fair income, and you will be depriving him perhaps of abrilliant career if you keep him here.” They suggested I should be sent toPetersburg to the Cadet Corps, that I might afterwards enter the ImperialGuard. My mother hesitated for a long time, it was awful to part with heronly child, but she made up her mind to it at last, though not withoutmany tears, believing she was acting for my happiness. She brought me toPetersburg and put me into the Cadet Corps, and I never saw her again. Forshe too died three years afterwards. She spent those three years mourningand grieving for both of us.
From the house of my childhood I have brought nothing but preciousmemories, for there are no memories more precious than those of earlychildhood in one’s first home. And that is almost always so if there isany love and harmony in the family at all. Indeed, precious memories mayremain even of a bad home, if only the heart knows how to find what isprecious. With my memories of home I count, too, my memories of the Bible,which, child as I was, I was very eager to read at home. I had a book ofScripture history then with excellent pictures, called _A Hundred and FourStories from the Old and New Testament_, and I learned to read from it. Ihave it lying on my shelf now, I keep it as a precious relic of the past.But even before I learned to read, I remember first being moved todevotional feeling at eight years old. My mother took me alone to mass (Idon’t remember where my brother was at the time) on the Monday beforeEaster. It was a fine day, and I remember to‐day, as though I saw it now,how the incense rose from the censer and softly floated upwards and,overhead in the cupola, mingled in rising waves with the sunlight thatstreamed in at the little window. I was stirred by the sight, and for thefirst time in my life I consciously received the seed of God’s word in myheart. A youth came out into the middle of the church carrying a big book,so large that at the time I fancied he could scarcely carry it. He laid iton the reading desk, opened it, and began reading, and suddenly for thefirst time I understood something read in the church of God. In the landof Uz, there lived a man, righteous and God‐fearing, and he had greatwealth, so many camels, so many sheep and asses, and his children feasted,and he loved them very much and prayed for them. “It may be that my sonshave sinned in their feasting.” Now the devil came before the Lordtogether with the sons of God, and said to the Lord that he had gone upand down the earth and under the earth. “And hast thou considered myservant Job?” God asked of him. And God boasted to the devil, pointing tohis great and holy servant. And the devil laughed at God’s words. “Givehim over to me and Thou wilt see that Thy servant will murmur against Theeand curse Thy name.” And God gave up the just man He loved so, to thedevil. And the devil smote his children and his cattle and scattered hiswealth, all of a sudden like a thunderbolt from heaven. And Job rent hismantle and fell down upon the ground and cried aloud, “Naked came I out ofmy mother’s womb, and naked shall I return into the earth; the Lord gaveand the Lord has taken away. Blessed be the name of the Lord for ever andever.”
Fathers and teachers, forgive my tears now, for all my childhood rises upagain before me, and I breathe now as I breathed then, with the breast ofa little child of eight, and I feel as I did then, awe and wonder andgladness. The camels at that time caught my imagination, and Satan, whotalked like that with God, and God who gave His servant up to destruction,and His servant crying out: “Blessed be Thy name although Thou dost punishme,” and then the soft and sweet singing in the church: “Let my prayerrise up before Thee,” and again incense from the priest’s censer and thekneeling and the prayer. Ever since then—only yesterday I took it up—I’venever been able to read that sacred tale without tears. And how much thatis great, mysterious and unfathomable there is in it! Afterwards I heardthe words of mockery and blame, proud words, “How could God give up themost loved of His saints for the diversion of the devil, take from him hischildren, smite him with sore boils so that he cleansed the corruptionfrom his sores with a pot‐sherd—and for no object except to boast to thedevil! ‘See what My saint can suffer for My sake.’ ” But the greatness ofit lies just in the fact that it is a mystery—that the passing earthlyshow and the eternal verity are brought together in it. In the face of theearthly truth, the eternal truth is accomplished. The Creator, just as onthe first days of creation He ended each day with praise: “That is goodthat I have created,” looks upon Job and again praises His creation. AndJob, praising the Lord, serves not only Him but all His creation forgenerations and generations, and for ever and ever, since for that he wasordained. Good heavens, what a book it is, and what lessons there are init! What a book the Bible is, what a miracle, what strength is given withit to man! It is like a mold cast of the world and man and human nature,everything is there, and a law for everything for all the ages. And whatmysteries are solved and revealed! God raises Job again, gives him wealthagain. Many years pass by, and he has other children and loves them. Buthow could he love those new ones when those first children are no more,when he has lost them? Remembering them, how could he be fully happy withthose new ones, however dear the new ones might be? But he could, hecould. It’s the great mystery of human life that old grief passesgradually into quiet, tender joy. The mild serenity of age takes the placeof the riotous blood of youth. I bless the rising sun each day, and, asbefore, my hearts sings to meet it, but now I love even more its setting,its long slanting rays and the soft, tender, gentle memories that comewith them, the dear images from the whole of my long, happy life—and overall the Divine Truth, softening, reconciling, forgiving! My life isending, I know that well, but every day that is left me I feel how myearthly life is in touch with a new infinite, unknown, that approachinglife, the nearness of which sets my soul quivering with rapture, my mindglowing and my heart weeping with joy.
Friends and teachers, I have heard more than once, and of late one mayhear it more often, that the priests, and above all the village priests,are complaining on all sides of their miserable income and theirhumiliating lot. They plainly state, even in print—I’ve read itmyself—that they are unable to teach the Scriptures to the people becauseof the smallness of their means, and if Lutherans and heretics come andlead the flock astray, they let them lead them astray because they have solittle to live upon. May the Lord increase the sustenance that is soprecious to them, for their complaint is just, too. But of a truth I say,if any one is to blame in the matter, half the fault is ours. For he maybe short of time, he may say truly that he is overwhelmed all the whilewith work and services, but still it’s not all the time, even he has anhour a week to remember God. And he does not work the whole year round.Let him gather round him once a week, some hour in the evening, if onlythe children at first—the fathers will hear of it and they too will beginto come. There’s no need to build halls for this, let him take them intohis own cottage. They won’t spoil his cottage, they would only be thereone hour. Let him open that book and begin reading it without grand wordsor superciliousness, without condescension to them, but gently and kindly,being glad that he is reading to them and that they are listening withattention, loving the words himself, only stopping from time to time toexplain words that are not understood by the peasants. Don’t be anxious,they will understand everything, the orthodox heart will understand all!Let him read them about Abraham and Sarah, about Isaac and Rebecca, of howJacob went to Laban and wrestled with the Lord in his dream and said,“This place is holy”—and he will impress the devout mind of the peasant.Let him read, especially to the children, how the brothers sold Joseph,the tender boy, the dreamer and prophet, into bondage, and told theirfather that a wild beast had devoured him, and showed him his blood‐stained clothes. Let him read them how the brothers afterwards journeyedinto Egypt for corn, and Joseph, already a great ruler, unrecognized bythem, tormented them, accused them, kept his brother Benjamin, and allthrough love: “I love you, and loving you I torment you.” For heremembered all his life how they had sold him to the merchants in theburning desert by the well, and how, wringing his hands, he had wept andbesought his brothers not to sell him as a slave in a strange land. Andhow, seeing them again after many years, he loved them beyond measure, buthe harassed and tormented them in love. He left them at last not able tobear the suffering of his heart, flung himself on his bed and wept. Then,wiping his tears away, he went out to them joyful and told them,“Brothers, I am your brother Joseph!” Let him read them further how happyold Jacob was on learning that his darling boy was still alive, and how hewent to Egypt leaving his own country, and died in a foreign land,bequeathing his great prophecy that had lain mysteriously hidden in hismeek and timid heart all his life, that from his offspring, from Judah,will come the great hope of the world, the Messiah and Saviour.
Fathers and teachers, forgive me and don’t be angry, that like a littlechild I’ve been babbling of what you know long ago, and can teach me ahundred times more skillfully. I only speak from rapture, and forgive mytears, for I love the Bible. Let him too weep, the priest of God, and besure that the hearts of his listeners will throb in response. Only alittle tiny seed is needed—drop it into the heart of the peasant and itwon’t die, it will live in his soul all his life, it will be hidden in themidst of his darkness and sin, like a bright spot, like a great reminder.And there’s no need of much teaching or explanation, he will understand itall simply. Do you suppose that the peasants don’t understand? Try readingthem the touching story of the fair Esther and the haughty Vashti; or themiraculous story of Jonah in the whale. Don’t forget either the parablesof Our Lord, choose especially from the Gospel of St. Luke (that is what Idid), and then from the Acts of the Apostles the conversion of St. Paul(that you mustn’t leave out on any account), and from the _Lives of theSaints_, for instance, the life of Alexey, the man of God and, greatest ofall, the happy martyr and the seer of God, Mary of Egypt—and you willpenetrate their hearts with these simple tales. Give one hour a week to itin spite of your poverty, only one little hour. And you will see foryourselves that our people is gracious and grateful, and will repay you ahundred‐fold. Mindful of the kindness of their priest and the moving wordsthey have heard from him, they will of their own accord help him in hisfields and in his house, and will treat him with more respect thanbefore—so that it will even increase his worldly well‐being too. The thingis so simple that sometimes one is even afraid to put it into words, forfear of being laughed at, and yet how true it is! One who does not believein God will not believe in God’s people. He who believes in God’s peoplewill see His Holiness too, even though he had not believed in it tillthen. Only the people and their future spiritual power will convert ouratheists, who have torn themselves away from their native soil.
And what is the use of Christ’s words, unless we set an example? Thepeople is lost without the Word of God, for its soul is athirst for theWord and for all that is good.
In my youth, long ago, nearly forty years ago, I traveled all over Russiawith Father Anfim, collecting funds for our monastery, and we stayed onenight on the bank of a great navigable river with some fishermen. A good‐looking peasant lad, about eighteen, joined us; he had to hurry back nextmorning to pull a merchant’s barge along the bank. I noticed him lookingstraight before him with clear and tender eyes. It was a bright, warm,still, July night, a cool mist rose from the broad river, we could hearthe plash of a fish, the birds were still, all was hushed and beautiful,everything praying to God. Only we two were not sleeping, the lad and I,and we talked of the beauty of this world of God’s and of the greatmystery of it. Every blade of grass, every insect, ant, and golden bee,all so marvelously know their path, though they have not intelligence,they bear witness to the mystery of God and continually accomplish itthemselves. I saw the dear lad’s heart was moved. He told me that he lovedthe forest and the forest birds. He was a bird‐catcher, knew the note ofeach of them, could call each bird. “I know nothing better than to be inthe forest,” said he, “though all things are good.”
“Truly,” I answered him, “all things are good and fair, because all istruth. Look,” said I, “at the horse, that great beast that is so near toman; or the lowly, pensive ox, which feeds him and works for him; look attheir faces, what meekness, what devotion to man, who often beats themmercilessly. What gentleness, what confidence and what beauty! It’stouching to know that there’s no sin in them, for all, all except man, issinless, and Christ has been with them before us.”
“Why,” asked the boy, “is Christ with them too?”
“It cannot but be so,” said I, “since the Word is for all. All creationand all creatures, every leaf is striving to the Word, singing glory toGod, weeping to Christ, unconsciously accomplishing this by the mystery oftheir sinless life. Yonder,” said I, “in the forest wanders the dreadfulbear, fierce and menacing, and yet innocent in it.” And I told him howonce a bear came to a great saint who had taken refuge in a tiny cell inthe wood. And the great saint pitied him, went up to him without fear andgave him a piece of bread. “Go along,” said he, “Christ be with you,” andthe savage beast walked away meekly and obediently, doing no harm. And thelad was delighted that the bear had walked away without hurting the saint,and that Christ was with him too. “Ah,” said he, “how good that is, howgood and beautiful is all God’s work!” He sat musing softly and sweetly. Isaw he understood. And he slept beside me a light and sinless sleep. MayGod bless youth! And I prayed for him as I went to sleep. Lord, send peaceand light to Thy people!


Chapter II. The Duel

_(c) Recollections of Father Zossima’s Youth before he became a Monk. TheDuel_
I spent a long time, almost eight years, in the military cadet school atPetersburg, and in the novelty of my surroundings there, many of mychildish impressions grew dimmer, though I forgot nothing. I picked up somany new habits and opinions that I was transformed into a cruel, absurd,almost savage creature. A surface polish of courtesy and society manners Idid acquire together with the French language.
But we all, myself included, looked upon the soldiers in our service ascattle. I was perhaps worse than the rest in that respect, for I was somuch more impressionable than my companions. By the time we left theschool as officers, we were ready to lay down our lives for the honor ofthe regiment, but no one of us had any knowledge of the real meaning ofhonor, and if any one had known it, he would have been the first toridicule it. Drunkenness, debauchery and devilry were what we almostprided ourselves on. I don’t say that we were bad by nature, all theseyoung men were good fellows, but they behaved badly, and I worst of all.What made it worse for me was that I had come into my own money, and so Iflung myself into a life of pleasure, and plunged headlong into all therecklessness of youth.
I was fond of reading, yet strange to say, the Bible was the one book Inever opened at that time, though I always carried it about with me, and Iwas never separated from it; in very truth I was keeping that book “forthe day and the hour, for the month and the year,” though I knew it not.
After four years of this life, I chanced to be in the town of K. where ourregiment was stationed at the time. We found the people of the townhospitable, rich and fond of entertainments. I met with a cordialreception everywhere, as I was of a lively temperament and was known to bewell off, which always goes a long way in the world. And then acircumstance happened which was the beginning of it all.
I formed an attachment to a beautiful and intelligent young girl of nobleand lofty character, the daughter of people much respected. They werewell‐to‐do people of influence and position. They always gave me a cordialand friendly reception. I fancied that the young lady looked on me withfavor and my heart was aflame at such an idea. Later on I saw and fullyrealized that I perhaps was not so passionately in love with her at all,but only recognized the elevation of her mind and character, which I couldnot indeed have helped doing. I was prevented, however, from making her anoffer at the time by my selfishness, I was loath to part with theallurements of my free and licentious bachelor life in the heyday of myyouth, and with my pockets full of money. I did drop some hint as to myfeelings however, though I put off taking any decisive step for a time.Then, all of a sudden, we were ordered off for two months to anotherdistrict.
On my return two months later, I found the young lady already married to arich neighboring landowner, a very amiable man, still young though olderthan I was, connected with the best Petersburg society, which I was not,and of excellent education, which I also was not. I was so overwhelmed atthis unexpected circumstance that my mind was positively clouded. Theworst of it all was that, as I learned then, the young landowner had beena long while betrothed to her, and I had met him indeed many times in herhouse, but blinded by my conceit I had noticed nothing. And thisparticularly mortified me; almost everybody had known all about it, whileI knew nothing. I was filled with sudden irrepressible fury. With flushedface I began recalling how often I had been on the point of declaring mylove to her, and as she had not attempted to stop me or to warn me, shemust, I concluded, have been laughing at me all the time. Later on, ofcourse, I reflected and remembered that she had been very far fromlaughing at me; on the contrary, she used to turn off any love‐making onmy part with a jest and begin talking of other subjects; but at thatmoment I was incapable of reflecting and was all eagerness for revenge. Iam surprised to remember that my wrath and revengeful feelings wereextremely repugnant to my own nature, for being of an easy temper, I foundit difficult to be angry with any one for long, and so I had to workmyself up artificially and became at last revolting and absurd.
I waited for an opportunity and succeeded in insulting my “rival” in thepresence of a large company. I insulted him on a perfectly extraneouspretext, jeering at his opinion upon an important public event—it was inthe year 1826—and my jeer was, so people said, clever and effective.Then I forced him to ask for an explanation, and behaved so rudely that heaccepted my challenge in spite of the vast inequality between us, as I wasyounger, a person of no consequence, and of inferior rank. I learnedafterwards for a fact that it was from a jealous feeling on his side alsothat my challenge was accepted; he had been rather jealous of me on hiswife’s account before their marriage; he fancied now that if he submittedto be insulted by me and refused to accept my challenge, and if she heardof it, she might begin to despise him and waver in her love for him. Isoon found a second in a comrade, an ensign of our regiment. In those daysthough duels were severely punished, yet dueling was a kind of fashionamong the officers—so strong and deeply rooted will a brutal prejudicesometimes be.
It was the end of June, and our meeting was to take place at seven o’clockthe next day on the outskirts of the town—and then something happened thatin very truth was the turning‐point of my life. In the evening, returninghome in a savage and brutal humor, I flew into a rage with my orderlyAfanasy, and gave him two blows in the face with all my might, so that itwas covered with blood. He had not long been in my service and I hadstruck him before, but never with such ferocious cruelty. And, believe me,though it’s forty years ago, I recall it now with shame and pain. I wentto bed and slept for about three hours; when I waked up the day wasbreaking. I got up—I did not want to sleep any more—I went to thewindow—opened it, it looked out upon the garden; I saw the sun rising; itwas warm and beautiful, the birds were singing.
“What’s the meaning of it?” I thought. “I feel in my heart as it weresomething vile and shameful. Is it because I am going to shed blood? No,”I thought, “I feel it’s not that. Can it be that I am afraid of death,afraid of being killed? No, that’s not it, that’s not it at all.”... Andall at once I knew what it was: it was because I had beaten Afanasy theevening before! It all rose before my mind, it all was as it were repeatedover again; he stood before me and I was beating him straight on the faceand he was holding his arms stiffly down, his head erect, his eyes fixedupon me as though on parade. He staggered at every blow and did not evendare to raise his hands to protect himself. That is what a man has beenbrought to, and that was a man beating a fellow creature! What a crime! Itwas as though a sharp dagger had pierced me right through. I stood as if Iwere struck dumb, while the sun was shining, the leaves were rejoicing andthe birds were trilling the praise of God.... I hid my face in my hands,fell on my bed and broke into a storm of tears. And then I remembered mybrother Markel and what he said on his death‐bed to his servants: “My dearones, why do you wait on me, why do you love me, am I worth your waitingon me?”
“Yes, am I worth it?” flashed through my mind. “After all what am I worth,that another man, a fellow creature, made in the likeness and image ofGod, should serve me?” For the first time in my life this question forceditself upon me. He had said, “Mother, my little heart, in truth we areeach responsible to all for all, it’s only that men don’t know this. Ifthey knew it, the world would be a paradise at once.”
“God, can that too be false?” I thought as I wept. “In truth, perhaps, Iam more than all others responsible for all, a greater sinner than all menin the world.” And all at once the whole truth in its full light appearedto me; what was I going to do? I was going to kill a good, clever, nobleman, who had done me no wrong, and by depriving his wife of happiness forthe rest of her life, I should be torturing and killing her too. I laythus in my bed with my face in the pillow, heedless how the time waspassing. Suddenly my second, the ensign, came in with the pistols to fetchme.
“Ah,” said he, “it’s a good thing you are up already, it’s time we wereoff, come along!”
I did not know what to do and hurried to and fro undecided; we went out tothe carriage, however.
“Wait here a minute,” I said to him. “I’ll be back directly, I haveforgotten my purse.”
And I ran back alone, to Afanasy’s little room.
“Afanasy,” I said, “I gave you two blows on the face yesterday, forgiveme,” I said.
He started as though he were frightened, and looked at me; and I saw thatit was not enough, and on the spot, in my full officer’s uniform, Idropped at his feet and bowed my head to the ground.
“Forgive me,” I said.
Then he was completely aghast.
“Your honor ... sir, what are you doing? Am I worth it?”
And he burst out crying as I had done before, hid this face in his hands,turned to the window and shook all over with his sobs. I flew out to mycomrade and jumped into the carriage.
“Ready,” I cried. “Have you ever seen a conqueror?” I asked him. “Here isone before you.”
I was in ecstasy, laughing and talking all the way, I don’t remember whatabout.
He looked at me. “Well, brother, you are a plucky fellow, you’ll keep upthe honor of the uniform, I can see.”
So we reached the place and found them there, waiting us. We were placedtwelve paces apart; he had the first shot. I stood gayly, looking him fullin the face; I did not twitch an eyelash, I looked lovingly at him, for Iknew what I would do. His shot just grazed my cheek and ear.
“Thank God,” I cried, “no man has been killed,” and I seized my pistol,turned back and flung it far away into the wood. “That’s the place foryou,” I cried.
I turned to my adversary.
“Forgive me, young fool that I am, sir,” I said, “for my unprovoked insultto you and for forcing you to fire at me. I am ten times worse than youand more, maybe. Tell that to the person whom you hold dearest in theworld.”
I had no sooner said this than they all three shouted at me.
“Upon my word,” cried my adversary, annoyed, “if you did not want tofight, why did not you let me alone?”
“Yesterday I was a fool, to‐day I know better,” I answered him gayly.
“As to yesterday, I believe you, but as for to‐day, it is difficult toagree with your opinion,” said he.
“Bravo,” I cried, clapping my hands. “I agree with you there too. I havedeserved it!”
“Will you shoot, sir, or not?”
“No, I won’t,” I said; “if you like, fire at me again, but it would bebetter for you not to fire.”
The seconds, especially mine, were shouting too: “Can you disgrace theregiment like this, facing your antagonist and begging his forgiveness! IfI’d only known this!”
I stood facing them all, not laughing now.
“Gentlemen,” I said, “is it really so wonderful in these days to find aman who can repent of his stupidity and publicly confess his wrongdoing?”
“But not in a duel,” cried my second again.
“That’s what’s so strange,” I said. “For I ought to have owned my fault assoon as I got here, before he had fired a shot, before leading him into agreat and deadly sin; but we have made our life so grotesque, that to actin that way would have been almost impossible, for only after I have facedhis shot at the distance of twelve paces could my words have anysignificance for him, and if I had spoken before, he would have said, ‘Heis a coward, the sight of the pistols has frightened him, no use to listento him.’ Gentlemen,” I cried suddenly, speaking straight from my heart,“look around you at the gifts of God, the clear sky, the pure air, thetender grass, the birds; nature is beautiful and sinless, and we, only we,are sinful and foolish, and we don’t understand that life is heaven, forwe have only to understand that and it will at once be fulfilled in allits beauty, we shall embrace each other and weep.”
I would have said more but I could not; my voice broke with the sweetnessand youthful gladness of it, and there was such bliss in my heart as I hadnever known before in my life.
“All this as rational and edifying,” said my antagonist, “and in any caseyou are an original person.”
“You may laugh,” I said to him, laughing too, “but afterwards you willapprove of me.”
“Oh, I am ready to approve of you now,” said he; “will you shake hands?for I believe you are genuinely sincere.”
“No,” I said, “not now, later on when I have grown worthier and deserveyour esteem, then shake hands and you will do well.”
We went home, my second upbraiding me all the way, while I kissed him. Allmy comrades heard of the affair at once and gathered together to passjudgment on me the same day.
“He has disgraced the uniform,” they said; “let him resign hiscommission.”
Some stood up for me: “He faced the shot,” they said.
“Yes, but he was afraid of his other shot and begged for forgiveness.”
“If he had been afraid of being shot, he would have shot his own pistolfirst before asking forgiveness, while he flung it loaded into the forest.No, there’s something else in this, something original.”
I enjoyed listening and looking at them. “My dear friends and comrades,”said I, “don’t worry about my resigning my commission, for I have done soalready. I have sent in my papers this morning and as soon as I get mydischarge I shall go into a monastery—it’s with that object I am leavingthe regiment.”
When I had said this every one of them burst out laughing.
“You should have told us of that first, that explains everything, we can’tjudge a monk.”
They laughed and could not stop themselves, and not scornfully, but kindlyand merrily. They all felt friendly to me at once, even those who had beensternest in their censure, and all the following month, before mydischarge came, they could not make enough of me. “Ah, you monk,” theywould say. And every one said something kind to me, they began trying todissuade me, even to pity me: “What are you doing to yourself?”
“No,” they would say, “he is a brave fellow, he faced fire and could havefired his own pistol too, but he had a dream the night before that heshould become a monk, that’s why he did it.”
It was the same thing with the society of the town. Till then I had beenkindly received, but had not been the object of special attention, and nowall came to know me at once and invited me; they laughed at me, but theyloved me. I may mention that although everybody talked openly of our duel,the authorities took no notice of it, because my antagonist was a nearrelation of our general, and as there had been no bloodshed and no seriousconsequences, and as I resigned my commission, they took it as a joke. AndI began then to speak aloud and fearlessly, regardless of their laughter,for it was always kindly and not spiteful laughter. These conversationsmostly took place in the evenings, in the company of ladies; womenparticularly liked listening to me then and they made the men listen.
“But how can I possibly be responsible for all?” every one would laugh inmy face. “Can I, for instance, be responsible for you?”
“You may well not know it,” I would answer, “since the whole world haslong been going on a different line, since we consider the veriest lies astruth and demand the same lies from others. Here I have for once in mylife acted sincerely and, well, you all look upon me as a madman. Thoughyou are friendly to me, yet, you see, you all laugh at me.”
“But how can we help being friendly to you?” said my hostess, laughing.The room was full of people. All of a sudden the young lady rose, on whoseaccount the duel had been fought and whom only lately I had intended to bemy future wife. I had not noticed her coming into the room. She got up,came to me and held out her hand.
“Let me tell you,” she said, “that I am the first not to laugh at you, buton the contrary I thank you with tears and express my respect for you foryour action then.”
Her husband, too, came up and then they all approached me and almostkissed me. My heart was filled with joy, but my attention was especiallycaught by a middle‐aged man who came up to me with the others. I knew himby name already, but had never made his acquaintance nor exchanged a wordwith him till that evening.
_(d) The Mysterious Visitor_
He had long been an official in the town; he was in a prominent position,respected by all, rich and had a reputation for benevolence. He subscribedconsiderable sums to the almshouse and the orphan asylum; he was verycharitable, too, in secret, a fact which only became known after hisdeath. He was a man of about fifty, almost stern in appearance and notmuch given to conversation. He had been married about ten years and hiswife, who was still young, had borne him three children. Well, I wassitting alone in my room the following evening, when my door suddenlyopened and this gentleman walked in.
I must mention, by the way, that I was no longer living in my formerquarters. As soon as I resigned my commission, I took rooms with an oldlady, the widow of a government clerk. My landlady’s servant waited uponme, for I had moved into her rooms simply because on my return from theduel I had sent Afanasy back to the regiment, as I felt ashamed to lookhim in the face after my last interview with him. So prone is the man ofthe world to be ashamed of any righteous action.
“I have,” said my visitor, “with great interest listened to you speakingin different houses the last few days and I wanted at last to make yourpersonal acquaintance, so as to talk to you more intimately. Can you, dearsir, grant me this favor?”
“I can, with the greatest pleasure, and I shall look upon it as an honor.”I said this, though I felt almost dismayed, so greatly was I impressedfrom the first moment by the appearance of this man. For though otherpeople had listened to me with interest and attention, no one had come tome before with such a serious, stern and concentrated expression. And nowhe had come to see me in my own rooms. He sat down.
“You are, I see, a man of great strength of character,” he said; “as youhave dared to serve the truth, even when by doing so you risked incurringthe contempt of all.”
“Your praise is, perhaps, excessive,” I replied.
“No, it’s not excessive,” he answered; “believe me, such a course ofaction is far more difficult than you think. It is that which hasimpressed me, and it is only on that account that I have come to you,” hecontinued. “Tell me, please, that is if you are not annoyed by my perhapsunseemly curiosity, what were your exact sensations, if you can recallthem, at the moment when you made up your mind to ask forgiveness at theduel. Do not think my question frivolous; on the contrary, I have inasking the question a secret motive of my own, which I will perhapsexplain to you later on, if it is God’s will that we should become moreintimately acquainted.”
All the while he was speaking, I was looking at him straight into the faceand I felt all at once a complete trust in him and great curiosity on myside also, for I felt that there was some strange secret in his soul.
“You ask what were my exact sensations at the moment when I asked myopponent’s forgiveness,” I answered; “but I had better tell you from thebeginning what I have not yet told any one else.” And I described all thathad passed between Afanasy and me, and how I had bowed down to the groundat his feet. “From that you can see for yourself,” I concluded, “that atthe time of the duel it was easier for me, for I had made a beginningalready at home, and when once I had started on that road, to go fartheralong it was far from being difficult, but became a source of joy andhappiness.”
I liked the way he looked at me as he listened. “All that,” he said, “isexceedingly interesting. I will come to see you again and again.”
And from that time forth he came to see me nearly every evening. And weshould have become greater friends, if only he had ever talked of himself.But about himself he scarcely ever said a word, yet continually asked meabout myself. In spite of that I became very fond of him and spoke withperfect frankness to him about all my feelings; “for,” thought I, “whatneed have I to know his secrets, since I can see without that that he is agood man? Moreover, though he is such a serious man and my senior, hecomes to see a youngster like me and treats me as his equal.” And Ilearned a great deal that was profitable from him, for he was a man oflofty mind.
“That life is heaven,” he said to me suddenly, “that I have long beenthinking about”; and all at once he added, “I think of nothing elseindeed.” He looked at me and smiled. “I am more convinced of it than youare, I will tell you later why.”
I listened to him and thought that he evidently wanted to tell mesomething.
“Heaven,” he went on, “lies hidden within all of us—here it lies hidden inme now, and if I will it, it will be revealed to me to‐morrow and for alltime.”
I looked at him; he was speaking with great emotion and gazingmysteriously at me, as if he were questioning me.
“And that we are all responsible to all for all, apart from our own sins,you were quite right in thinking that, and it is wonderful how you couldcomprehend it in all its significance at once. And in very truth, so soonas men understand that, the Kingdom of Heaven will be for them not adream, but a living reality.”
“And when,” I cried out to him bitterly, “when will that come to pass? andwill it ever come to pass? Is not it simply a dream of ours?”
“What then, you don’t believe it,” he said. “You preach it and don’tbelieve it yourself. Believe me, this dream, as you call it, will come topass without doubt; it will come, but not now, for every process has itslaw. It’s a spiritual, psychological process. To transform the world, torecreate it afresh, men must turn into another path psychologically. Untilyou have become really, in actual fact, a brother to every one,brotherhood will not come to pass. No sort of scientific teaching, no kindof common interest, will ever teach men to share property and privilegeswith equal consideration for all. Every one will think his share too smalland they will be always envying, complaining and attacking one another.You ask when it will come to pass; it will come to pass, but first we haveto go through the period of isolation.”
“What do you mean by isolation?” I asked him.
“Why, the isolation that prevails everywhere, above all in our age—it hasnot fully developed, it has not reached its limit yet. For every onestrives to keep his individuality as apart as possible, wishes to securethe greatest possible fullness of life for himself; but meantime all hisefforts result not in attaining fullness of life but self‐destruction, forinstead of self‐realization he ends by arriving at complete solitude. Allmankind in our age have split up into units, they all keep apart, each inhis own groove; each one holds aloof, hides himself and hides what he has,from the rest, and he ends by being repelled by others and repelling them.He heaps up riches by himself and thinks, ‘How strong I am now and howsecure,’ and in his madness he does not understand that the more he heapsup, the more he sinks into self‐destructive impotence. For he isaccustomed to rely upon himself alone and to cut himself off from thewhole; he has trained himself not to believe in the help of others, in menand in humanity, and only trembles for fear he should lose his money andthe privileges that he has won for himself. Everywhere in these days menhave, in their mockery, ceased to understand that the true security is tobe found in social solidarity rather than in isolated individual effort.But this terrible individualism must inevitably have an end, and all willsuddenly understand how unnaturally they are separated from one another.It will be the spirit of the time, and people will marvel that they havesat so long in darkness without seeing the light. And then the sign of theSon of Man will be seen in the heavens.... But, until then, we must keepthe banner flying. Sometimes even if he has to do it alone, and hisconduct seems to be crazy, a man must set an example, and so draw men’ssouls out of their solitude, and spur them to some act of brotherly love,that the great idea may not die.”
Our evenings, one after another, were spent in such stirring and ferventtalk. I gave up society and visited my neighbors much less frequently.Besides, my vogue was somewhat over. I say this, not as blame, for theystill loved me and treated me good‐humoredly, but there’s no denying thatfashion is a great power in society. I began to regard my mysteriousvisitor with admiration, for besides enjoying his intelligence, I began toperceive that he was brooding over some plan in his heart, and waspreparing himself perhaps for a great deed. Perhaps he liked my notshowing curiosity about his secret, not seeking to discover it by directquestion nor by insinuation. But I noticed at last, that he seemed to showsigns of wanting to tell me something. This had become quite evident,indeed, about a month after he first began to visit me.
“Do you know,” he said to me once, “that people are very inquisitive aboutus in the town and wonder why I come to see you so often. But let themwonder, for _soon all will be explained_.”
Sometimes an extraordinary agitation would come over him, and almostalways on such occasions he would get up and go away. Sometimes he wouldfix a long piercing look upon me, and I thought, “He will say somethingdirectly now.” But he would suddenly begin talking of something ordinaryand familiar. He often complained of headache too.
One day, quite unexpectedly indeed, after he had been talking with greatfervor a long time, I saw him suddenly turn pale, and his face workedconvulsively, while he stared persistently at me.
“What’s the matter?” I said; “do you feel ill?”—he had just beencomplaining of headache.
“I ... do you know ... I murdered some one.”
He said this and smiled with a face as white as chalk. “Why is it he issmiling?” The thought flashed through my mind before I realized anythingelse. I too turned pale.
“What are you saying?” I cried.
“You see,” he said, with a pale smile, “how much it has cost me to say thefirst word. Now I have said it, I feel I’ve taken the first step and shallgo on.”
For a long while I could not believe him, and I did not believe him atthat time, but only after he had been to see me three days running andtold me all about it. I thought he was mad, but ended by being convinced,to my great grief and amazement. His crime was a great and terrible one.
Fourteen years before, he had murdered the widow of a landowner, a wealthyand handsome young woman who had a house in our town. He fell passionatelyin love with her, declared his feeling and tried to persuade her to marryhim. But she had already given her heart to another man, an officer ofnoble birth and high rank in the service, who was at that time away at thefront, though she was expecting him soon to return. She refused his offerand begged him not to come and see her. After he had ceased to visit her,he took advantage of his knowledge of the house to enter at night throughthe garden by the roof, at great risk of discovery. But, as often happens,a crime committed with extraordinary audacity is more successful thanothers.
Entering the garret through the skylight, he went down the ladder, knowingthat the door at the bottom of it was sometimes, through the negligence ofthe servants, left unlocked. He hoped to find it so, and so it was. Hemade his way in the dark to her bedroom, where a light was burning. Asthough on purpose, both her maids had gone off to a birthday‐party in thesame street, without asking leave. The other servants slept in theservants’ quarters or in the kitchen on the ground‐floor. His passionflamed up at the sight of her asleep, and then vindictive, jealous angertook possession of his heart, and like a drunken man, beside himself, hethrust a knife into her heart, so that she did not even cry out. Then withdevilish and criminal cunning he contrived that suspicion should fall onthe servants. He was so base as to take her purse, to open her chest withkeys from under her pillow, and to take some things from it, doing it allas it might have been done by an ignorant servant, leaving valuable papersand taking only money. He took some of the larger gold things, but leftsmaller articles that were ten times as valuable. He took with him, too,some things for himself as remembrances, but of that later. Having donethis awful deed, he returned by the way he had come.
Neither the next day, when the alarm was raised, nor at any time after inhis life, did any one dream of suspecting that he was the criminal. No oneindeed knew of his love for her, for he was always reserved and silent andhad no friend to whom he would have opened his heart. He was looked uponsimply as an acquaintance, and not a very intimate one, of the murderedwoman, as for the previous fortnight he had not even visited her. A serfof hers called Pyotr was at once suspected, and every circumstanceconfirmed the suspicion. The man knew—indeed his mistress did not concealthe fact—that having to send one of her serfs as a recruit she had decidedto send him, as he had no relations and his conduct was unsatisfactory.People had heard him angrily threatening to murder her when he was drunkin a tavern. Two days before her death, he had run away, staying no oneknew where in the town. The day after the murder, he was found on the roadleading out of the town, dead drunk, with a knife in his pocket, and hisright hand happened to be stained with blood. He declared that his nosehad been bleeding, but no one believed him. The maids confessed that theyhad gone to a party and that the street‐door had been left open till theyreturned. And a number of similar details came to light, throwingsuspicion on the innocent servant.
They arrested him, and he was tried for the murder; but a week after thearrest, the prisoner fell sick of a fever and died unconscious in thehospital. There the matter ended and the judges and the authorities andevery one in the town remained convinced that the crime had been committedby no one but the servant who had died in the hospital. And after that thepunishment began.
My mysterious visitor, now my friend, told me that at first he was not inthe least troubled by pangs of conscience. He was miserable a long time,but not for that reason; only from regret that he had killed the woman heloved, that she was no more, that in killing her he had killed his love,while the fire of passion was still in his veins. But of the innocentblood he had shed, of the murder of a fellow creature, he scarcelythought. The thought that his victim might have become the wife of anotherman was insupportable to him, and so, for a long time, he was convinced inhis conscience that he could not have acted otherwise.
At first he was worried at the arrest of the servant, but his illness anddeath soon set his mind at rest, for the man’s death was apparently (so hereflected at the time) not owing to his arrest or his fright, but a chillhe had taken on the day he ran away, when he had lain all night dead drunkon the damp ground. The theft of the money and other things troubled himlittle, for he argued that the theft had not been committed for gain butto avert suspicion. The sum stolen was small, and he shortly afterwardssubscribed the whole of it, and much more, towards the funds formaintaining an almshouse in the town. He did this on purpose to set hisconscience at rest about the theft, and it’s a remarkable fact that for along time he really was at peace—he told me this himself. He entered thenupon a career of great activity in the service, volunteered for adifficult and laborious duty, which occupied him two years, and being aman of strong will almost forgot the past. Whenever he recalled it, hetried not to think of it at all. He became active in philanthropy too,founded and helped to maintain many institutions in the town, did a gooddeal in the two capitals, and in both Moscow and Petersburg was elected amember of philanthropic societies.
At last, however, he began brooding over the past, and the strain of itwas too much for him. Then he was attracted by a fine and intelligent girland soon after married her, hoping that marriage would dispel his lonelydepression, and that by entering on a new life and scrupulously doing hisduty to his wife and children, he would escape from old memoriesaltogether. But the very opposite of what he expected happened. He began,even in the first month of his marriage, to be continually fretted by thethought, “My wife loves me—but what if she knew?” When she first told himthat she would soon bear him a child, he was troubled. “I am giving life,but I have taken life.” Children came. “How dare I love them, teach andeducate them, how can I talk to them of virtue? I have shed blood.” Theywere splendid children, he longed to caress them; “and I can’t look attheir innocent candid faces, I am unworthy.”
At last he began to be bitterly and ominously haunted by the blood of hismurdered victim, by the young life he had destroyed, by the blood thatcried out for vengeance. He had begun to have awful dreams. But, being aman of fortitude, he bore his suffering a long time, thinking: “I shallexpiate everything by this secret agony.” But that hope, too, was vain;the longer it went on, the more intense was his suffering.
He was respected in society for his active benevolence, though every onewas overawed by his stern and gloomy character. But the more he wasrespected, the more intolerable it was for him. He confessed to me that hehad thoughts of killing himself. But he began to be haunted by anotheridea—an idea which he had at first regarded as impossible and unthinkable,though at last it got such a hold on his heart that he could not shake itoff. He dreamed of rising up, going out and confessing in the face of allmen that he had committed murder. For three years this dream had pursuedhim, haunting him in different forms. At last he believed with his wholeheart that if he confessed his crime, he would heal his soul and would beat peace for ever. But this belief filled his heart with terror, for howcould he carry it out? And then came what happened at my duel.
“Looking at you, I have made up my mind.”
I looked at him.
“Is it possible,” I cried, clasping my hands, “that such a trivialincident could give rise to such a resolution in you?”
“My resolution has been growing for the last three years,” he answered,“and your story only gave the last touch to it. Looking at you, Ireproached myself and envied you.” He said this to me almost sullenly.
“But you won’t be believed,” I observed; “it’s fourteen years ago.”
“I have proofs, great proofs. I shall show them.”
Then I cried and kissed him.
“Tell me one thing, one thing,” he said (as though it all depended uponme), “my wife, my children! My wife may die of grief, and though mychildren won’t lose their rank and property, they’ll be a convict’schildren and for ever! And what a memory, what a memory of me I shallleave in their hearts!”
I said nothing.
“And to part from them, to leave them for ever? It’s for ever, you know,for ever!”
I sat still and repeated a silent prayer. I got up at last, I felt afraid.
“Well?” He looked at me.
“Go!” said I, “confess. Everything passes, only the truth remains. Yourchildren will understand, when they grow up, the nobility of yourresolution.”
He left me that time as though he had made up his mind. Yet for more thana fortnight afterwards, he came to me every evening, still preparinghimself, still unable to bring himself to the point. He made my heartache. One day he would come determined and say fervently:
“I know it will be heaven for me, heaven, the moment I confess. Fourteenyears I’ve been in hell. I want to suffer. I will take my punishment andbegin to live. You can pass through the world doing wrong, but there’s noturning back. Now I dare not love my neighbor nor even my own children.Good God, my children will understand, perhaps, what my punishment hascost me and will not condemn me! God is not in strength but in truth.”
“All will understand your sacrifice,” I said to him, “if not at once, theywill understand later; for you have served truth, the higher truth, not ofthe earth.”
And he would go away seeming comforted, but next day he would come again,bitter, pale, sarcastic.
“Every time I come to you, you look at me so inquisitively as though tosay, ‘He has still not confessed!’ Wait a bit, don’t despise me too much.It’s not such an easy thing to do, as you would think. Perhaps I shall notdo it at all. You won’t go and inform against me then, will you?”
And far from looking at him with indiscreet curiosity, I was afraid tolook at him at all. I was quite ill from anxiety, and my heart was full oftears. I could not sleep at night.
“I have just come from my wife,” he went on. “Do you understand what theword ‘wife’ means? When I went out, the children called to me, ‘Good‐by,father, make haste back to read _The Children’s Magazine_ with us.’ No,you don’t understand that! No one is wise from another man’s woe.”
His eyes were glittering, his lips were twitching. Suddenly he struck thetable with his fist so that everything on it danced—it was the first timehe had done such a thing, he was such a mild man.
“But need I?” he exclaimed, “must I? No one has been condemned, no one hasbeen sent to Siberia in my place, the man died of fever. And I’ve beenpunished by my sufferings for the blood I shed. And I shan’t be believed,they won’t believe my proofs. Need I confess, need I? I am ready to go onsuffering all my life for the blood I have shed, if only my wife andchildren may be spared. Will it be just to ruin them with me? Aren’t wemaking a mistake? What is right in this case? And will people recognizeit, will they appreciate it, will they respect it?”
“Good Lord!” I thought to myself, “he is thinking of other people’srespect at such a moment!” And I felt so sorry for him then, that Ibelieve I would have shared his fate if it could have comforted him. I sawhe was beside himself. I was aghast, realizing with my heart as well as mymind what such a resolution meant.
“Decide my fate!” he exclaimed again.
“Go and confess,” I whispered to him. My voice failed me, but I whisperedit firmly. I took up the New Testament from the table, the Russiantranslation, and showed him the Gospel of St. John, chapter xii. verse 24:
“Verily, verily, I say unto you, except a corn of wheat fall into theground and die, it abideth alone: but if it die, it bringeth forth muchfruit.”
I had just been reading that verse when he came in. He read it.
“That’s true,” he said, but he smiled bitterly. “It’s terrible the thingsyou find in those books,” he said, after a pause. “It’s easy enough tothrust them upon one. And who wrote them? Can they have been written bymen?”
“The Holy Spirit wrote them,” said I.
“It’s easy for you to prate,” he smiled again, this time almost withhatred.
I took the book again, opened it in another place and showed him theEpistle to the Hebrews, chapter x. verse 31. He read:
“It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.”
He read it and simply flung down the book. He was trembling all over.
“An awful text,” he said. “There’s no denying you’ve picked out fittingones.” He rose from the chair. “Well!” he said, “good‐by, perhaps I shan’tcome again ... we shall meet in heaven. So I have been for fourteen years‘in the hands of the living God,’ that’s how one must think of thosefourteen years. To‐morrow I will beseech those hands to let me go.”
I wanted to take him in my arms and kiss him, but I did not dare—his facewas contorted and somber. He went away.
“Good God,” I thought, “what has he gone to face!” I fell on my kneesbefore the ikon and wept for him before the Holy Mother of God, our swiftdefender and helper. I was half an hour praying in tears, and it was late,about midnight. Suddenly I saw the door open and he came in again. I wassurprised.
“Where have you been?” I asked him.
“I think,” he said, “I’ve forgotten something ... my handkerchief, Ithink.... Well, even if I’ve not forgotten anything, let me stay alittle.”
He sat down. I stood over him.
“You sit down, too,” said he.
I sat down. We sat still for two minutes; he looked intently at me andsuddenly smiled—I remembered that—then he got up, embraced me warmly andkissed me.
“Remember,” he said, “how I came to you a second time. Do you hear,remember it!”
And he went out.
“To‐morrow,” I thought.
And so it was. I did not know that evening that the next day was hisbirthday. I had not been out for the last few days, so I had no chance ofhearing it from any one. On that day he always had a great gathering,every one in the town went to it. It was the same this time. After dinnerhe walked into the middle of the room, with a paper in his hand—a formaldeclaration to the chief of his department who was present. Thisdeclaration he read aloud to the whole assembly. It contained a fullaccount of the crime, in every detail.
“I cut myself off from men as a monster. God has visited me,” he said inconclusion. “I want to suffer for my sin!”
Then he brought out and laid on the table all the things he had beenkeeping for fourteen years, that he thought would prove his crime, thejewels belonging to the murdered woman which he had stolen to divertsuspicion, a cross and a locket taken from her neck with a portrait of herbetrothed in the locket, her notebook and two letters; one from herbetrothed, telling her that he would soon be with her, and her unfinishedanswer left on the table to be sent off next day. He carried off these twoletters—what for? Why had he kept them for fourteen years afterwardsinstead of destroying them as evidence against him?
And this is what happened: every one was amazed and horrified, every onerefused to believe it and thought that he was deranged, though alllistened with intense curiosity. A few days later it was fully decided andagreed in every house that the unhappy man was mad. The legal authoritiescould not refuse to take the case up, but they too dropped it. Though thetrinkets and letters made them ponder, they decided that even if they didturn out to be authentic, no charge could be based on those alone.Besides, she might have given him those things as a friend, or asked himto take care of them for her. I heard afterwards, however, that thegenuineness of the things was proved by the friends and relations of themurdered woman, and that there was no doubt about them. Yet nothing wasdestined to come of it, after all.
Five days later, all had heard that he was ill and that his life was indanger. The nature of his illness I can’t explain, they said it was anaffection of the heart. But it became known that the doctors had beeninduced by his wife to investigate his mental condition also, and had cometo the conclusion that it was a case of insanity. I betrayed nothing,though people ran to question me. But when I wanted to visit him, I wasfor a long while forbidden to do so, above all by his wife.
“It’s you who have caused his illness,” she said to me; “he was alwaysgloomy, but for the last year people noticed that he was peculiarlyexcited and did strange things, and now you have been the ruin of him.Your preaching has brought him to this; for the last month he was alwayswith you.”
Indeed, not only his wife but the whole town were down upon me and blamedme. “It’s all your doing,” they said. I was silent and indeed rejoiced atheart, for I saw plainly God’s mercy to the man who had turned againsthimself and punished himself. I could not believe in his insanity.
They let me see him at last, he insisted upon saying good‐by to me. I wentin to him and saw at once, that not only his days, but his hours werenumbered. He was weak, yellow, his hands trembled, he gasped for breath,but his face was full of tender and happy feeling.
“It is done!” he said. “I’ve long been yearning to see you, why didn’t youcome?”
I did not tell him that they would not let me see him.
“God has had pity on me and is calling me to Himself. I know I am dying,but I feel joy and peace for the first time after so many years. There washeaven in my heart from the moment I had done what I had to do. Now I dareto love my children and to kiss them. Neither my wife nor the judges, norany one has believed it. My children will never believe it either. I seein that God’s mercy to them. I shall die, and my name will be without astain for them. And now I feel God near, my heart rejoices as in Heaven... I have done my duty.”
He could not speak, he gasped for breath, he pressed my hand warmly,looking fervently at me. We did not talk for long, his wife kept peepingin at us. But he had time to whisper to me:
“Do you remember how I came back to you that second time, at midnight? Itold you to remember it. You know what I came back for? I came to killyou!”
I started.
“I went out from you then into the darkness, I wandered about the streets,struggling with myself. And suddenly I hated you so that I could hardlybear it. Now, I thought, he is all that binds me, and he is my judge. Ican’t refuse to face my punishment to‐morrow, for he knows all. It was notthat I was afraid you would betray me (I never even thought of that), butI thought, ‘How can I look him in the face if I don’t confess?’ And if youhad been at the other end of the earth, but alive, it would have been allthe same, the thought was unendurable that you were alive knowingeverything and condemning me. I hated you as though you were the cause, asthough you were to blame for everything. I came back to you then,remembering that you had a dagger lying on your table. I sat down andasked you to sit down, and for a whole minute I pondered. If I had killedyou, I should have been ruined by that murder even if I had not confessedthe other. But I didn’t think about that at all, and I didn’t want tothink of it at that moment. I only hated you and longed to revenge myselfon you for everything. The Lord vanquished the devil in my heart. But letme tell you, you were never nearer death.”
A week later he died. The whole town followed him to the grave. The chiefpriest made a speech full of feeling. All lamented the terrible illnessthat had cut short his days. But all the town was up in arms against meafter the funeral, and people even refused to see me. Some, at first a fewand afterwards more, began indeed to believe in the truth of his story,and they visited me and questioned me with great interest and eagerness,for man loves to see the downfall and disgrace of the righteous. But Iheld my tongue, and very shortly after, I left the town, and five monthslater by God’s grace I entered upon the safe and blessed path, praisingthe unseen finger which had guided me so clearly to it. But I remember inmy prayer to this day, the servant of God, Mihail, who suffered sogreatly.


Chapter III. Conversations And Exhortations Of Father Zossima

_(e) The Russian Monk and his possible Significance_
Fathers and teachers, what is the monk? In the cultivated world the wordis nowadays pronounced by some people with a jeer, and by others it isused as a term of abuse, and this contempt for the monk is growing. It istrue, alas, it is true, that there are many sluggards, gluttons,profligates and insolent beggars among monks. Educated people point tothese: “You are idlers, useless members of society, you live on the laborof others, you are shameless beggars.” And yet how many meek and humblemonks there are, yearning for solitude and fervent prayer in peace! Theseare less noticed, or passed over in silence. And how surprised men wouldbe if I were to say that from these meek monks, who yearn for solitaryprayer, the salvation of Russia will come perhaps once more! For they arein truth made ready in peace and quiet “for the day and the hour, themonth and the year.” Meanwhile, in their solitude, they keep the image ofChrist fair and undefiled, in the purity of God’s truth, from the times ofthe Fathers of old, the Apostles and the martyrs. And when the time comesthey will show it to the tottering creeds of the world. That is a greatthought. That star will rise out of the East.
That is my view of the monk, and is it false? is it too proud? Look at theworldly and all who set themselves up above the people of God, has notGod’s image and His truth been distorted in them? They have science; butin science there is nothing but what is the object of sense. The spiritualworld, the higher part of man’s being is rejected altogether, dismissedwith a sort of triumph, even with hatred. The world has proclaimed thereign of freedom, especially of late, but what do we see in this freedomof theirs? Nothing but slavery and self‐destruction! For the world says:
“You have desires and so satisfy them, for you have the same rights as themost rich and powerful. Don’t be afraid of satisfying them and evenmultiply your desires.” That is the modern doctrine of the world. In thatthey see freedom. And what follows from this right of multiplication ofdesires? In the rich, isolation and spiritual suicide; in the poor, envyand murder; for they have been given rights, but have not been shown themeans of satisfying their wants. They maintain that the world is gettingmore and more united, more and more bound together in brotherly community,as it overcomes distance and sets thoughts flying through the air.
Alas, put no faith in such a bond of union. Interpreting freedom as themultiplication and rapid satisfaction of desires, men distort their ownnature, for many senseless and foolish desires and habits and ridiculousfancies are fostered in them. They live only for mutual envy, for luxuryand ostentation. To have dinners, visits, carriages, rank and slaves towait on one is looked upon as a necessity, for which life, honor and humanfeeling are sacrificed, and men even commit suicide if they are unable tosatisfy it. We see the same thing among those who are not rich, while thepoor drown their unsatisfied need and their envy in drunkenness. But soonthey will drink blood instead of wine, they are being led on to it. I askyou is such a man free? I knew one “champion of freedom” who told mehimself that, when he was deprived of tobacco in prison, he was sowretched at the privation that he almost went and betrayed his cause forthe sake of getting tobacco again! And such a man says, “I am fighting forthe cause of humanity.”
How can such a one fight? what is he fit for? He is capable perhaps ofsome action quickly over, but he cannot hold out long. And it’s no wonderthat instead of gaining freedom they have sunk into slavery, and insteadof serving the cause of brotherly love and the union of humanity havefallen, on the contrary, into dissension and isolation, as my mysteriousvisitor and teacher said to me in my youth. And therefore the idea of theservice of humanity, of brotherly love and the solidarity of mankind, ismore and more dying out in the world, and indeed this idea is sometimestreated with derision. For how can a man shake off his habits? What canbecome of him if he is in such bondage to the habit of satisfying theinnumerable desires he has created for himself? He is isolated, and whatconcern has he with the rest of humanity? They have succeeded inaccumulating a greater mass of objects, but the joy in the world has grownless.
The monastic way is very different. Obedience, fasting and prayer arelaughed at, yet only through them lies the way to real, true freedom. Icut off my superfluous and unnecessary desires, I subdue my proud andwanton will and chastise it with obedience, and with God’s help I attainfreedom of spirit and with it spiritual joy. Which is most capable ofconceiving a great idea and serving it—the rich man in his isolation orthe man who has freed himself from the tyranny of material things andhabits? The monk is reproached for his solitude, “You have secludedyourself within the walls of the monastery for your own salvation, andhave forgotten the brotherly service of humanity!” But we shall see whichwill be most zealous in the cause of brotherly love. For it is not we, butthey, who are in isolation, though they don’t see that. Of old, leaders ofthe people came from among us, and why should they not again? The samemeek and humble ascetics will rise up and go out to work for the greatcause. The salvation of Russia comes from the people. And the Russian monkhas always been on the side of the people. We are isolated only if thepeople are isolated. The people believe as we do, and an unbelievingreformer will never do anything in Russia, even if he is sincere in heartand a genius. Remember that! The people will meet the atheist and overcomehim, and Russia will be one and orthodox. Take care of the peasant andguard his heart. Go on educating him quietly. That’s your duty as monks,for the peasant has God in his heart.
(_f_) _Of Masters and Servants, and of whether it is possible for them tobe Brothers in the Spirit_
Of course, I don’t deny that there is sin in the peasants too. And thefire of corruption is spreading visibly, hourly, working from abovedownwards. The spirit of isolation is coming upon the people too. Money‐lenders and devourers of the commune are rising up. Already the merchantgrows more and more eager for rank, and strives to show himself culturedthough he has not a trace of culture, and to this end meanly despises hisold traditions, and is even ashamed of the faith of his fathers. He visitsprinces, though he is only a peasant corrupted. The peasants are rottingin drunkenness and cannot shake off the habit. And what cruelty to theirwives, to their children even! All from drunkenness! I’ve seen in thefactories children of nine years old, frail, rickety, bent and alreadydepraved. The stuffy workshop, the din of machinery, work all day long,the vile language and the drink, the drink—is that what a little child’sheart needs? He needs sunshine, childish play, good examples all abouthim, and at least a little love. There must be no more of this, monks, nomore torturing of children, rise up and preach that, make haste, makehaste!
But God will save Russia, for though the peasants are corrupted and cannotrenounce their filthy sin, yet they know it is cursed by God and that theydo wrong in sinning. So that our people still believe in righteousness,have faith in God and weep tears of devotion.
It is different with the upper classes. They, following science, want tobase justice on reason alone, but not with Christ, as before, and theyhave already proclaimed that there is no crime, that there is no sin. Andthat’s consistent, for if you have no God what is the meaning of crime? InEurope the people are already rising up against the rich with violence,and the leaders of the people are everywhere leading them to bloodshed,and teaching them that their wrath is righteous. But their “wrath isaccursed, for it is cruel.” But God will save Russia as He has saved hermany times. Salvation will come from the people, from their faith andtheir meekness.
Fathers and teachers, watch over the people’s faith and this will not be adream. I’ve been struck all my life in our great people by their dignity,their true and seemly dignity. I’ve seen it myself, I can testify to it,I’ve seen it and marveled at it, I’ve seen it in spite of the degradedsins and poverty‐stricken appearance of our peasantry. They are notservile, and even after two centuries of serfdom they are free in mannerand bearing, yet without insolence, and not revengeful and not envious.“You are rich and noble, you are clever and talented, well, be so, Godbless you. I respect you, but I know that I too am a man. By the very factthat I respect you without envy I prove my dignity as a man.”
In truth if they don’t say this (for they don’t know how to say this yet),that is how they act. I have seen it myself, I have known it myself, and,would you believe it, the poorer our Russian peasant is, the morenoticeable is that serene goodness, for the rich among them are for themost part corrupted already, and much of that is due to our carelessnessand indifference. But God will save His people, for Russia is great in herhumility. I dream of seeing, and seem to see clearly already, our future.It will come to pass, that even the most corrupt of our rich will end bybeing ashamed of his riches before the poor, and the poor, seeing hishumility, will understand and give way before him, will respond joyfullyand kindly to his honorable shame. Believe me that it will end in that;things are moving to that. Equality is to be found only in the spiritualdignity of man, and that will only be understood among us. If we werebrothers, there would be fraternity, but before that, they will neveragree about the division of wealth. We preserve the image of Christ, andit will shine forth like a precious diamond to the whole world. So may itbe, so may it be!
Fathers and teachers, a touching incident befell me once. In my wanderingsI met in the town of K. my old orderly, Afanasy. It was eight years sinceI had parted from him. He chanced to see me in the market‐place,recognized me, ran up to me, and how delighted he was! He simply pouncedon me: “Master dear, is it you? Is it really you I see?” He took me homewith him.
He was no longer in the army, he was married and already had two littlechildren. He and his wife earned their living as costermongers in themarket‐place. His room was poor, but bright and clean. He made me sitdown, set the samovar, sent for his wife, as though my appearance were afestival for them. He brought me his children: “Bless them, Father.”
“Is it for me to bless them? I am only a humble monk. I will pray forthem. And for you, Afanasy Pavlovitch, I have prayed every day since thatday, for it all came from you,” said I. And I explained that to him aswell as I could. And what do you think? The man kept gazing at me andcould not believe that I, his former master, an officer, was now beforehim in such a guise and position; it made him shed tears.
“Why are you weeping?” said I, “better rejoice over me, dear friend, whomI can never forget, for my path is a glad and joyful one.”
He did not say much, but kept sighing and shaking his head over metenderly.
“What has became of your fortune?” he asked.
“I gave it to the monastery,” I answered; “we live in common.”
After tea I began saying good‐by, and suddenly he brought out half arouble as an offering to the monastery, and another half‐rouble I saw himthrusting hurriedly into my hand: “That’s for you in your wanderings, itmay be of use to you, Father.”
I took his half‐rouble, bowed to him and his wife, and went out rejoicing.And on my way I thought: “Here we are both now, he at home and I on theroad, sighing and shaking our heads, no doubt, and yet smiling joyfully inthe gladness of our hearts, remembering how God brought about ourmeeting.”
I have never seen him again since then. I had been his master and he myservant, but now when we exchanged a loving kiss with softened hearts,there was a great human bond between us. I have thought a great deal aboutthat, and now what I think is this: Is it so inconceivable that that grandand simple‐hearted unity might in due time become universal among theRussian people? I believe that it will come to pass and that the time isat hand.
And of servants I will add this: In old days when I was young I was oftenangry with servants; “the cook had served something too hot, the orderlyhad not brushed my clothes.” But what taught me better then was a thoughtof my dear brother’s, which I had heard from him in childhood: “Am I worthit, that another should serve me and be ordered about by me in his povertyand ignorance?” And I wondered at the time that such simple and self‐evident ideas should be so slow to occur to our minds.
It is impossible that there should be no servants in the world, but act sothat your servant may be freer in spirit than if he were not a servant.And why cannot I be a servant to my servant and even let him see it, andthat without any pride on my part or any mistrust on his? Why should notmy servant be like my own kindred, so that I may take him into my familyand rejoice in doing so? Even now this can be done, but it will lead tothe grand unity of men in the future, when a man will not seek servantsfor himself, or desire to turn his fellow creatures into servants as hedoes now, but on the contrary, will long with his whole heart to be theservant of all, as the Gospel teaches.
And can it be a dream, that in the end man will find his joy only in deedsof light and mercy, and not in cruel pleasures as now, in gluttony,fornication, ostentation, boasting and envious rivalry of one with theother? I firmly believe that it is not and that the time is at hand.People laugh and ask: “When will that time come and does it look likecoming?” I believe that with Christ’s help we shall accomplish this greatthing. And how many ideas there have been on earth in the history of manwhich were unthinkable ten years before they appeared! Yet when theirdestined hour had come, they came forth and spread over the whole earth.So it will be with us, and our people will shine forth in the world, andall men will say: “The stone which the builders rejected has become thecorner‐stone of the building.”
And we may ask the scornful themselves: If our hope is a dream, when willyou build up your edifice and order things justly by your intellect alone,without Christ? If they declare that it is they who are advancing towardsunity, only the most simple‐hearted among them believe it, so that one maypositively marvel at such simplicity. Of a truth, they have more fantasticdreams than we. They aim at justice, but, denying Christ, they will end byflooding the earth with blood, for blood cries out for blood, and he thattaketh up the sword shall perish by the sword. And if it were not forChrist’s covenant, they would slaughter one another down to the last twomen on earth. And those two last men would not be able to restrain eachother in their pride, and the one would slay the other and then himself.And that would come to pass, were it not for the promise of Christ thatfor the sake of the humble and meek the days shall be shortened.
While I was still wearing an officer’s uniform after my duel, I talkedabout servants in general society, and I remember every one was amazed atme. “What!” they asked, “are we to make our servants sit down on the sofaand offer them tea?” And I answered them: “Why not, sometimes at least?”Every one laughed. Their question was frivolous and my answer was notclear; but the thought in it was to some extent right.
(_g_) _Of Prayer, of Love, and of Contact with other Worlds_
Young man, be not forgetful of prayer. Every time you pray, if your prayeris sincere, there will be new feeling and new meaning in it, which willgive you fresh courage, and you will understand that prayer is aneducation. Remember, too, every day, and whenever you can, repeat toyourself, “Lord, have mercy on all who appear before Thee to‐day.” Forevery hour and every moment thousands of men leave life on this earth, andtheir souls appear before God. And how many of them depart in solitude,unknown, sad, dejected that no one mourns for them or even knows whetherthey have lived or not! And behold, from the other end of the earthperhaps, your prayer for their rest will rise up to God though you knewthem not nor they you. How touching it must be to a soul standing in dreadbefore the Lord to feel at that instant that, for him too, there is one topray, that there is a fellow creature left on earth to love him too! AndGod will look on you both more graciously, for if you have had so muchpity on him, how much will He have pity Who is infinitely more loving andmerciful than you! And He will forgive him for your sake.
Brothers, have no fear of men’s sin. Love a man even in his sin, for thatis the semblance of Divine Love and is the highest love on earth. Love allGod’s creation, the whole and every grain of sand in it. Love every leaf,every ray of God’s light. Love the animals, love the plants, loveeverything. If you love everything, you will perceive the divine mysteryin things. Once you perceive it, you will begin to comprehend it betterevery day. And you will come at last to love the whole world with an all‐embracing love. Love the animals: God has given them the rudiments ofthought and joy untroubled. Do not trouble it, don’t harass them, don’tdeprive them of their happiness, don’t work against God’s intent. Man, donot pride yourself on superiority to the animals; they are without sin,and you, with your greatness, defile the earth by your appearance on it,and leave the traces of your foulness after you—alas, it is true of almostevery one of us! Love children especially, for they too are sinless likethe angels; they live to soften and purify our hearts and as it were toguide us. Woe to him who offends a child! Father Anfim taught me to lovechildren. The kind, silent man used often on our wanderings to spend thefarthings given us on sweets and cakes for the children. He could not passby a child without emotion. That’s the nature of the man.
At some thoughts one stands perplexed, especially at the sight of men’ssin, and wonders whether one should use force or humble love. Alwaysdecide to use humble love. If you resolve on that once for all, you maysubdue the whole world. Loving humility is marvelously strong, thestrongest of all things, and there is nothing else like it.
Every day and every hour, every minute, walk round yourself and watchyourself, and see that your image is a seemly one. You pass by a littlechild, you pass by, spiteful, with ugly words, with wrathful heart; youmay not have noticed the child, but he has seen you, and your image,unseemly and ignoble, may remain in his defenseless heart. You don’t knowit, but you may have sown an evil seed in him and it may grow, and allbecause you were not careful before the child, because you did not fosterin yourself a careful, actively benevolent love. Brothers, love is ateacher; but one must know how to acquire it, for it is hard to acquire,it is dearly bought, it is won slowly by long labor. For we must love notonly occasionally, for a moment, but for ever. Every one can loveoccasionally, even the wicked can.
My brother asked the birds to forgive him; that sounds senseless, but itis right; for all is like an ocean, all is flowing and blending; a touchin one place sets up movement at the other end of the earth. It may besenseless to beg forgiveness of the birds, but birds would be happier atyour side—a little happier, anyway—and children and all animals, if youwere nobler than you are now. It’s all like an ocean, I tell you. Then youwould pray to the birds too, consumed by an all‐embracing love, in a sortof transport, and pray that they too will forgive you your sin. Treasurethis ecstasy, however senseless it may seem to men.
My friends, pray to God for gladness. Be glad as children, as the birds ofheaven. And let not the sin of men confound you in your doings. Fear notthat it will wear away your work and hinder its being accomplished. Do notsay, “Sin is mighty, wickedness is mighty, evil environment is mighty, andwe are lonely and helpless, and evil environment is wearing us away andhindering our good work from being done.” Fly from that dejection,children! There is only one means of salvation, then take yourself andmake yourself responsible for all men’s sins, that is the truth, you know,friends, for as soon as you sincerely make yourself responsible foreverything and for all men, you will see at once that it is really so, andthat you are to blame for every one and for all things. But throwing yourown indolence and impotence on others you will end by sharing the pride ofSatan and murmuring against God.
Of the pride of Satan what I think is this: it is hard for us on earth tocomprehend it, and therefore it is so easy to fall into error and to shareit, even imagining that we are doing something grand and fine. Indeed,many of the strongest feelings and movements of our nature we cannotcomprehend on earth. Let not that be a stumbling‐block, and think not thatit may serve as a justification to you for anything. For the Eternal Judgeasks of you what you can comprehend and not what you cannot. You will knowthat yourself hereafter, for you will behold all things truly then andwill not dispute them. On earth, indeed, we are as it were astray, and ifit were not for the precious image of Christ before us, we should beundone and altogether lost, as was the human race before the flood. Muchon earth is hidden from us, but to make up for that we have been given aprecious mystic sense of our living bond with the other world, with thehigher heavenly world, and the roots of our thoughts and feelings are nothere but in other worlds. That is why the philosophers say that we cannotapprehend the reality of things on earth.
God took seeds from different worlds and sowed them on this earth, and Hisgarden grew up and everything came up that could come up, but what growslives and is alive only through the feeling of its contact with othermysterious worlds. If that feeling grows weak or is destroyed in you, theheavenly growth will die away in you. Then you will be indifferent to lifeand even grow to hate it. That’s what I think.
_(h) Can a Man judge his Fellow Creatures? Faith to the End_
Remember particularly that you cannot be a judge of any one. For no onecan judge a criminal, until he recognizes that he is just such a criminalas the man standing before him, and that he perhaps is more than all mento blame for that crime. When he understands that, he will be able to be ajudge. Though that sounds absurd, it is true. If I had been righteousmyself, perhaps there would have been no criminal standing before me. Ifyou can take upon yourself the crime of the criminal your heart isjudging, take it at once, suffer for him yourself, and let him go withoutreproach. And even if the law itself makes you his judge, act in the samespirit so far as possible, for he will go away and condemn himself morebitterly than you have done. If, after your kiss, he goes away untouched,mocking at you, do not let that be a stumbling‐block to you. It shows histime has not yet come, but it will come in due course. And if it come not,no matter; if not he, then another in his place will understand andsuffer, and judge and condemn himself, and the truth will be fulfilled.Believe that, believe it without doubt; for in that lies all the hope andfaith of the saints.
Work without ceasing. If you remember in the night as you go to sleep, “Ihave not done what I ought to have done,” rise up at once and do it. Ifthe people around you are spiteful and callous and will not hear you, falldown before them and beg their forgiveness; for in truth you are to blamefor their not wanting to hear you. And if you cannot speak to them intheir bitterness, serve them in silence and in humility, never losinghope. If all men abandon you and even drive you away by force, then whenyou are left alone fall on the earth and kiss it, water it with your tearsand it will bring forth fruit even though no one has seen or heard you inyour solitude. Believe to the end, even if all men went astray and youwere left the only one faithful; bring your offering even then and praiseGod in your loneliness. And if two of you are gathered together—then thereis a whole world, a world of living love. Embrace each other tenderly andpraise God, for if only in you two His truth has been fulfilled.
If you sin yourself and grieve even unto death for your sins or for yoursudden sin, then rejoice for others, rejoice for the righteous man,rejoice that if you have sinned, he is righteous and has not sinned.
If the evil‐doing of men moves you to indignation and overwhelmingdistress, even to a desire for vengeance on the evil‐doers, shun above allthings that feeling. Go at once and seek suffering for yourself, as thoughyou were yourself guilty of that wrong. Accept that suffering and bear itand your heart will find comfort, and you will understand that you too areguilty, for you might have been a light to the evil‐doers, even as the oneman sinless, and you were not a light to them. If you had been a light,you would have lightened the path for others too, and the evil‐doer mightperhaps have been saved by your light from his sin. And even though yourlight was shining, yet you see men were not saved by it, hold firm anddoubt not the power of the heavenly light. Believe that if they were notsaved, they will be saved hereafter. And if they are not saved hereafter,then their sons will be saved, for your light will not die even when youare dead. The righteous man departs, but his light remains. Men are alwayssaved after the death of the deliverer. Men reject their prophets and slaythem, but they love their martyrs and honor those whom they have slain.You are working for the whole, you are acting for the future. Seek noreward, for great is your reward on this earth: the spiritual joy which isonly vouchsafed to the righteous man. Fear not the great nor the mighty,but be wise and ever serene. Know the measure, know the times, study that.When you are left alone, pray. Love to throw yourself on the earth andkiss it. Kiss the earth and love it with an unceasing, consuming love.Love all men, love everything. Seek that rapture and ecstasy. Water theearth with the tears of your joy and love those tears. Don’t be ashamed ofthat ecstasy, prize it, for it is a gift of God and a great one; it is notgiven to many but only to the elect.
_(i) Of Hell and Hell Fire, a Mystic Reflection_
Fathers and teachers, I ponder, “What is hell?” I maintain that it is thesuffering of being unable to love. Once in infinite existence,immeasurable in time and space, a spiritual creature was given on hiscoming to earth, the power of saying, “I am and I love.” Once, only once,there was given him a moment of active _living_ love, and for that wasearthly life given him, and with it times and seasons. And that happycreature rejected the priceless gift, prized it and loved it not, scornedit and remained callous. Such a one, having left the earth, sees Abraham’sbosom and talks with Abraham as we are told in the parable of the rich manand Lazarus, and beholds heaven and can go up to the Lord. But that isjust his torment, to rise up to the Lord without ever having loved, to bebrought close to those who have loved when he has despised their love. Forhe sees clearly and says to himself, “Now I have understanding, and thoughI now thirst to love, there will be nothing great, no sacrifice in mylove, for my earthly life is over, and Abraham will not come even with adrop of living water (that is the gift of earthly active life) to cool thefiery thirst of spiritual love which burns in me now, though I despised iton earth; there is no more life for me and will be no more time! Eventhough I would gladly give my life for others, it can never be, for thatlife is passed which can be sacrificed for love, and now there is a gulffixed between that life and this existence.”
They talk of hell fire in the material sense. I don’t go into that mysteryand I shun it. But I think if there were fire in material sense, theywould be glad of it, for I imagine that in material agony, their stillgreater spiritual agony would be forgotten for a moment. Moreover, thatspiritual agony cannot be taken from them, for that suffering is notexternal but within them. And if it could be taken from them, I think itwould be bitterer still for the unhappy creatures. For even if therighteous in Paradise forgave them, beholding their torments, and calledthem up to heaven in their infinite love, they would only multiply theirtorments, for they would arouse in them still more keenly a flaming thirstfor responsive, active and grateful love which is now impossible. In thetimidity of my heart I imagine, however, that the very recognition of thisimpossibility would serve at last to console them. For accepting the loveof the righteous together with the impossibility of repaying it, by thissubmissiveness and the effect of this humility, they will attain at last,as it were, to a certain semblance of that active love which they scornedin life, to something like its outward expression.... I am sorry, friendsand brothers, that I cannot express this clearly. But woe to those whohave slain themselves on earth, woe to the suicides! I believe that therecan be none more miserable then they. They tell us that it is a sin topray for them and outwardly the Church, as it were, renounces them, but inmy secret heart I believe that we may pray even for them. Love can neverbe an offense to Christ. For such as those I have prayed inwardly all mylife, I confess it, fathers and teachers, and even now I pray for themevery day.
Oh, there are some who remain proud and fierce even in hell, in spite oftheir certain knowledge and contemplation of the absolute truth; there aresome fearful ones who have given themselves over to Satan and his proudspirit entirely. For such, hell is voluntary and ever consuming; they aretortured by their own choice. For they have cursed themselves, cursing Godand life. They live upon their vindictive pride like a starving man in thedesert sucking blood out of his own body. But they are never satisfied,and they refuse forgiveness, they curse God Who calls them. They cannotbehold the living God without hatred, and they cry out that the God oflife should be annihilated, that God should destroy Himself and His owncreation. And they will burn in the fire of their own wrath for ever andyearn for death and annihilation. But they will not attain to death....
                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
Here Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov’s manuscript ends. I repeat, it isincomplete and fragmentary. Biographical details, for instance, cover onlyFather Zossima’s earliest youth. Of his teaching and opinions we findbrought together sayings evidently uttered on very different occasions.His utterances during the last few hours have not been kept separate fromthe rest, but their general character can be gathered from what we have inAlexey Fyodorovitch’s manuscript.
The elder’s death came in the end quite unexpectedly. For although thosewho were gathered about him that last evening realized that his death wasapproaching, yet it was difficult to imagine that it would come sosuddenly. On the contrary, his friends, as I observed already, seeing himthat night apparently so cheerful and talkative, were convinced that therewas at least a temporary change for the better in his condition. Even fiveminutes before his death, they said afterwards wonderingly, it wasimpossible to foresee it. He seemed suddenly to feel an acute pain in hischest, he turned pale and pressed his hands to his heart. All rose fromtheir seats and hastened to him. But though suffering, he still looked atthem with a smile, sank slowly from his chair on to his knees, then bowedhis face to the ground, stretched out his arms and as though in joyfulecstasy, praying and kissing the ground, quietly and joyfully gave up hissoul to God.
The news of his death spread at once through the hermitage and reached themonastery. The nearest friends of the deceased and those whose duty it wasfrom their position began to lay out the corpse according to the ancientritual, and all the monks gathered together in the church. And before dawnthe news of the death reached the town. By the morning all the town wastalking of the event, and crowds were flocking from the town to themonastery. But this subject will be treated in the next book; I will onlyadd here that before a day had passed something happened so unexpected, sostrange, upsetting, and bewildering in its effect on the monks and thetownspeople, that after all these years, that day of general suspense isstill vividly remembered in the town.




PART III



Book VII. Alyosha


Chapter I. The Breath Of Corruption

The body of Father Zossima was prepared for burial according to theestablished ritual. As is well known, the bodies of dead monks and hermitsare not washed. In the words of the Church Ritual: “If any one of themonks depart in the Lord, the monk designated (that is, whose office itis) shall wipe the body with warm water, making first the sign of thecross with a sponge on the forehead of the deceased, on the breast, on thehands and feet and on the knees, and that is enough.” All this was done byFather Païssy, who then clothed the deceased in his monastic garb andwrapped him in his cloak, which was, according to custom, somewhat slit toallow of its being folded about him in the form of a cross. On his head heput a hood with an eight‐cornered cross. The hood was left open and thedead man’s face was covered with black gauze. In his hands was put an ikonof the Saviour. Towards morning he was put in the coffin which had beenmade ready long before. It was decided to leave the coffin all day in thecell, in the larger room in which the elder used to receive his visitorsand fellow monks. As the deceased was a priest and monk of the strictestrule, the Gospel, not the Psalter, had to be read over his body by monksin holy orders. The reading was begun by Father Iosif immediately afterthe requiem service. Father Païssy desired later on to read the Gospel allday and night over his dead friend, but for the present he, as well as theFather Superintendent of the Hermitage, was very busy and occupied, forsomething extraordinary, an unheard‐of, even “unseemly” excitement andimpatient expectation began to be apparent in the monks, and the visitorsfrom the monastery hostels, and the crowds of people flocking from thetown. And as time went on, this grew more and more marked. Both theSuperintendent and Father Païssy did their utmost to calm the generalbustle and agitation.
When it was fully daylight, some people began bringing their sick, in mostcases children, with them from the town—as though they had been waitingexpressly for this moment to do so, evidently persuaded that the deadelder’s remains had a power of healing, which would be immediately mademanifest in accordance with their faith. It was only then apparent howunquestionably every one in our town had accepted Father Zossima duringhis lifetime as a great saint. And those who came were far from being allof the humbler classes.
This intense expectation on the part of believers displayed with suchhaste, such openness, even with impatience and almost insistence,impressed Father Païssy as unseemly. Though he had long foreseen somethingof the sort, the actual manifestation of the feeling was beyond anythinghe had looked for. When he came across any of the monks who displayed thisexcitement, Father Païssy began to reprove them. “Such immediateexpectation of something extraordinary,” he said, “shows a levity,possible to worldly people but unseemly in us.”
But little attention was paid him and Father Païssy noticed it uneasily.Yet he himself (if the whole truth must be told), secretly at the bottomof his heart, cherished almost the same hopes and could not but be awareof it, though he was indignant at the too impatient expectation aroundhim, and saw in it light‐mindedness and vanity. Nevertheless, it wasparticularly unpleasant to him to meet certain persons, whose presencearoused in him great misgivings. In the crowd in the dead man’s cell henoticed with inward aversion (for which he immediately reproached himself)the presence of Rakitin and of the monk from Obdorsk, who was stillstaying in the monastery. Of both of them Father Païssy felt for somereason suddenly suspicious—though, indeed, he might well have felt thesame about others.
The monk from Obdorsk was conspicuous as the most fussy in the excitedcrowd. He was to be seen everywhere; everywhere he was asking questions,everywhere he was listening, on all sides he was whispering with apeculiar, mysterious air. His expression showed the greatest impatienceand even a sort of irritation.
As for Rakitin, he, as appeared later, had come so early to the hermitageat the special request of Madame Hohlakov. As soon as that good‐heartedbut weak‐minded woman, who could not herself have been admitted to thehermitage, waked and heard of the death of Father Zossima, she wasovertaken with such intense curiosity that she promptly dispatched Rakitinto the hermitage, to keep a careful look out and report to her by letterevery half‐hour or so “_everything that takes place_.” She regardedRakitin as a most religious and devout young man. He was particularlyclever in getting round people and assuming whatever part he thought mostto their taste, if he detected the slightest advantage to himself fromdoing so.
It was a bright, clear day, and many of the visitors were thronging aboutthe tombs, which were particularly numerous round the church and scatteredhere and there about the hermitage. As he walked round the hermitage,Father Païssy remembered Alyosha and that he had not seen him for sometime, not since the night. And he had no sooner thought of him than he atonce noticed him in the farthest corner of the hermitage garden, sittingon the tombstone of a monk who had been famous long ago for hissaintliness. He sat with his back to the hermitage and his face to thewall, and seemed to be hiding behind the tombstone. Going up to him,Father Païssy saw that he was weeping quietly but bitterly, with his facehidden in his hands, and that his whole frame was shaking with sobs.Father Païssy stood over him for a little.
“Enough, dear son, enough, dear,” he pronounced with feeling at last. “Whydo you weep? Rejoice and weep not. Don’t you know that this is thegreatest of his days? Think only where he is now, at this moment!”
Alyosha glanced at him, uncovering his face, which was swollen with cryinglike a child’s, but turned away at once without uttering a word and hidhis face in his hands again.
“Maybe it is well,” said Father Païssy thoughtfully; “weep if you must,Christ has sent you those tears.”
“Your touching tears are but a relief to your spirit and will serve togladden your dear heart,” he added to himself, walking away from Alyosha,and thinking lovingly of him. He moved away quickly, however, for he feltthat he too might weep looking at him.
Meanwhile the time was passing; the monastery services and the requiemsfor the dead followed in their due course. Father Païssy again took FatherIosif’s place by the coffin and began reading the Gospel. But before threeo’clock in the afternoon that something took place to which I alluded atthe end of the last book, something so unexpected by all of us and socontrary to the general hope, that, I repeat, this trivial incident hasbeen minutely remembered to this day in our town and all the surroundingneighborhood. I may add here, for myself personally, that I feel it almostrepulsive to recall that event which caused such frivolous agitation andwas such a stumbling‐block to many, though in reality it was the mostnatural and trivial matter. I should, of course, have omitted all mentionof it in my story, if it had not exerted a very strong influence on theheart and soul of the chief, though future, hero of my story, Alyosha,forming a crisis and turning‐point in his spiritual development, giving ashock to his intellect, which finally strengthened it for the rest of hislife and gave it a definite aim.
And so, to return to our story. When before dawn they laid FatherZossima’s body in the coffin and brought it into the front room, thequestion of opening the windows was raised among those who were around thecoffin. But this suggestion made casually by some one was unanswered andalmost unnoticed. Some of those present may perhaps have inwardly noticedit, only to reflect that the anticipation of decay and corruption from thebody of such a saint was an actual absurdity, calling for compassion (ifnot a smile) for the lack of faith and the frivolity it implied. For theyexpected something quite different.
And, behold, soon after midday there were signs of something, at firstonly observed in silence by those who came in and out and were evidentlyeach afraid to communicate the thought in his mind. But by three o’clockthose signs had become so clear and unmistakable, that the news swiftlyreached all the monks and visitors in the hermitage, promptly penetratedto the monastery, throwing all the monks into amazement, and finally, inthe shortest possible time, spread to the town, exciting every one in it,believers and unbelievers alike. The unbelievers rejoiced, and as for thebelievers some of them rejoiced even more than the unbelievers, for “menlove the downfall and disgrace of the righteous,” as the deceased elderhad said in one of his exhortations.
The fact is that a smell of decomposition began to come from the coffin,growing gradually more marked, and by three o’clock it was quiteunmistakable. In all the past history of our monastery, no such scandalcould be recalled, and in no other circumstances could such a scandal havebeen possible, as showed itself in unseemly disorder immediately afterthis discovery among the very monks themselves. Afterwards, even manyyears afterwards, some sensible monks were amazed and horrified, when theyrecalled that day, that the scandal could have reached such proportions.For in the past, monks of very holy life had died, God‐fearing old men,whose saintliness was acknowledged by all, yet from their humble coffins,too, the breath of corruption had come, naturally, as from all deadbodies, but that had caused no scandal nor even the slightest excitement.Of course there had been, in former times, saints in the monastery whosememory was carefully preserved and whose relics, according to tradition,showed no signs of corruption. This fact was regarded by the monks astouching and mysterious, and the tradition of it was cherished assomething blessed and miraculous, and as a promise, by God’s grace, ofstill greater glory from their tombs in the future.
One such, whose memory was particularly cherished, was an old monk, Job,who had died seventy years before at the age of a hundred and five. He hadbeen a celebrated ascetic, rigid in fasting and silence, and his tomb waspointed out to all visitors on their arrival with peculiar respect andmysterious hints of great hopes connected with it. (That was the very tombon which Father Païssy had found Alyosha sitting in the morning.) Anothermemory cherished in the monastery was that of the famous Father Varsonofy,who was only recently dead and had preceded Father Zossima in theeldership. He was reverenced during his lifetime as a crazy saint by allthe pilgrims to the monastery. There was a tradition that both of thesehad lain in their coffins as though alive, that they had shown no signs ofdecomposition when they were buried and that there had been a holy lightin their faces. And some people even insisted that a sweet fragrance camefrom their bodies.
Yet, in spite of these edifying memories, it would be difficult to explainthe frivolity, absurdity and malice that were manifested beside the coffinof Father Zossima. It is my private opinion that several different causeswere simultaneously at work, one of which was the deeply‐rooted hostilityto the institution of elders as a pernicious innovation, an antipathyhidden deep in the hearts of many of the monks. Even more powerful wasjealousy of the dead man’s saintliness, so firmly established during hislifetime that it was almost a forbidden thing to question it. For thoughthe late elder had won over many hearts, more by love than by miracles,and had gathered round him a mass of loving adherents, none the less, infact, rather the more on that account he had awakened jealousy and so hadcome to have bitter enemies, secret and open, not only in the monasterybut in the world outside it. He did no one any harm, but “Why do theythink him so saintly?” And that question alone, gradually repeated, gaverise at last to an intense, insatiable hatred of him. That, I believe, waswhy many people were extremely delighted at the smell of decompositionwhich came so quickly, for not a day had passed since his death. At thesame time there were some among those who had been hitherto reverentlydevoted to the elder, who were almost mortified and personally affrontedby this incident. This was how the thing happened.
As soon as signs of decomposition had begun to appear, the whole aspect ofthe monks betrayed their secret motives in entering the cell. They wentin, stayed a little while and hastened out to confirm the news to thecrowd of other monks waiting outside. Some of the latter shook their headsmournfully, but others did not even care to conceal the delight whichgleamed unmistakably in their malignant eyes. And now no one reproachedthem for it, no one raised his voice in protest, which was strange, forthe majority of the monks had been devoted to the dead elder. But itseemed as though God had in this case let the minority get the upper handfor a time.
Visitors from outside, particularly of the educated class, soon went intothe cell, too, with the same spying intent. Of the peasantry few went intothe cell, though there were crowds of them at the gates of the hermitage.After three o’clock the rush of worldly visitors was greatly increased andthis was no doubt owing to the shocking news. People were attracted whowould not otherwise have come on that day and had not intended to come,and among them were some personages of high standing. But external decorumwas still preserved and Father Païssy, with a stern face, continued firmlyand distinctly reading aloud the Gospel, apparently not noticing what wastaking place around him, though he had, in fact, observed somethingunusual long before. But at last the murmurs, first subdued but graduallylouder and more confident, reached even him. “It shows God’s judgment isnot as man’s,” Father Païssy heard suddenly. The first to give utteranceto this sentiment was a layman, an elderly official from the town, knownto be a man of great piety. But he only repeated aloud what the monks hadlong been whispering. They had long before formulated this damningconclusion, and the worst of it was that a sort of triumphant satisfactionat that conclusion became more and more apparent every moment. Soon theybegan to lay aside even external decorum and almost seemed to feel theyhad a sort of right to discard it.
“And for what reason can _this_ have happened,” some of the monks said, atfirst with a show of regret; “he had a small frame and his flesh was driedup on his bones, what was there to decay?”
“It must be a sign from heaven,” others hastened to add, and their opinionwas adopted at once without protest. For it was pointed out, too, that ifthe decomposition had been natural, as in the case of every dead sinner,it would have been apparent later, after a lapse of at least twenty‐fourhours, but this premature corruption “was in excess of nature,” and so thefinger of God was evident. It was meant for a sign. This conclusion seemedirresistible.
Gentle Father Iosif, the librarian, a great favorite of the dead man’s,tried to reply to some of the evil speakers that “this is not heldeverywhere alike,” and that the incorruptibility of the bodies of the justwas not a dogma of the Orthodox Church, but only an opinion, and that evenin the most Orthodox regions, at Athos for instance, they were not greatlyconfounded by the smell of corruption, and there the chief sign of theglorification of the saved was not bodily incorruptibility, but the colorof the bones when the bodies have lain many years in the earth and havedecayed in it. “And if the bones are yellow as wax, that is the great signthat the Lord has glorified the dead saint, if they are not yellow butblack, it shows that God has not deemed him worthy of such glory—that isthe belief in Athos, a great place, where the Orthodox doctrine has beenpreserved from of old, unbroken and in its greatest purity,” said FatherIosif in conclusion.
But the meek Father’s words had little effect and even provoked a mockingretort. “That’s all pedantry and innovation, no use listening to it,” themonks decided. “We stick to the old doctrine, there are all sorts ofinnovations nowadays, are we to follow them all?” added others.
“We have had as many holy fathers as they had. There they are among theTurks, they have forgotten everything. Their doctrine has long been impureand they have no bells even,” the most sneering added.
Father Iosif walked away, grieving the more since he had put forward hisown opinion with little confidence as though scarcely believing in ithimself. He foresaw with distress that something very unseemly wasbeginning and that there were positive signs of disobedience. Little bylittle, all the sensible monks were reduced to silence like Father Iosif.And so it came to pass that all who loved the elder and had accepted withdevout obedience the institution of the eldership were all at onceterribly cast down and glanced timidly in one another’s faces, when theymet. Those who were hostile to the institution of elders, as a novelty,held up their heads proudly. “There was no smell of corruption from thelate elder Varsonofy, but a sweet fragrance,” they recalled malignantly.“But he gained that glory not because he was an elder, but because he wasa holy man.”
And this was followed by a shower of criticism and even blame of FatherZossima. “His teaching was false; he taught that life is a great joy andnot a vale of tears,” said some of the more unreasonable. “He followed thefashionable belief, he did not recognize material fire in hell,” others,still more unreasonable, added. “He was not strict in fasting, allowedhimself sweet things, ate cherry jam with his tea, ladies used to send itto him. Is it for a monk of strict rule to drink tea?” could be heardamong some of the envious. “He sat in pride,” the most malignant declaredvindictively; “he considered himself a saint and he took it as his duewhen people knelt before him.” “He abused the sacrament of confession,”the fiercest opponents of the institution of elders added in a maliciouswhisper. And among these were some of the oldest monks, strictest in theirdevotion, genuine ascetics, who had kept silent during the life of thedeceased elder, but now suddenly unsealed their lips. And this wasterrible, for their words had great influence on young monks who were notyet firm in their convictions. The monk from Obdorsk heard all thisattentively, heaving deep sighs and nodding his head. “Yes, clearly FatherFerapont was right in his judgment yesterday,” and at that moment FatherFerapont himself made his appearance, as though on purpose to increase theconfusion.
I have mentioned already that he rarely left his wooden cell by theapiary. He was seldom even seen at church and they overlooked this neglecton the ground of his craziness, and did not keep him to the rules bindingon all the rest. But if the whole truth is to be told, they hardly had achoice about it. For it would have been discreditable to insist onburdening with the common regulations so great an ascetic, who prayed dayand night (he even dropped asleep on his knees). If they had insisted, themonks would have said, “He is holier than all of us and he follows a ruleharder than ours. And if he does not go to church, it’s because he knowswhen he ought to; he has his own rule.” It was to avoid the chance ofthese sinful murmurs that Father Ferapont was left in peace.
As every one was aware, Father Ferapont particularly disliked FatherZossima. And now the news had reached him in his hut that “God’s judgmentis not the same as man’s,” and that something had happened which was “inexcess of nature.” It may well be supposed that among the first to run tohim with the news was the monk from Obdorsk, who had visited him theevening before and left his cell terror‐stricken.
I have mentioned above, that though Father Païssy, standing firm andimmovable reading the Gospel over the coffin, could not hear nor see whatwas passing outside the cell, he gauged most of it correctly in his heart,for he knew the men surrounding him, well. He was not shaken by it, butawaited what would come next without fear, watching with penetration andinsight for the outcome of the general excitement.
Suddenly an extraordinary uproar in the passage in open defiance ofdecorum burst on his ears. The door was flung open and Father Ferapontappeared in the doorway. Behind him there could be seen accompanying him acrowd of monks, together with many people from the town. They did not,however, enter the cell, but stood at the bottom of the steps, waiting tosee what Father Ferapont would say or do. For they felt with a certainawe, in spite of their audacity, that he had not come for nothing.Standing in the doorway, Father Ferapont raised his arms, and under hisright arm the keen inquisitive little eyes of the monk from Obdorsk peepedin. He alone, in his intense curiosity, could not resist running up thesteps after Father Ferapont. The others, on the contrary, pressed fartherback in sudden alarm when the door was noisily flung open. Holding hishands aloft, Father Ferapont suddenly roared:
“Casting out I cast out!” and, turning in all directions, he began at oncemaking the sign of the cross at each of the four walls and four corners ofthe cell in succession. All who accompanied Father Ferapont immediatelyunderstood his action. For they knew he always did this wherever he went,and that he would not sit down or say a word, till he had driven out theevil spirits.
“Satan, go hence! Satan, go hence!” he repeated at each sign of the cross.“Casting out I cast out,” he roared again.
He was wearing his coarse gown girt with a rope. His bare chest, coveredwith gray hair, could be seen under his hempen shirt. His feet were bare.As soon as he began waving his arms, the cruel irons he wore under hisgown could be heard clanking.
Father Païssy paused in his reading, stepped forward and stood before himwaiting.
“What have you come for, worthy Father? Why do you offend against goodorder? Why do you disturb the peace of the flock?” he said at last,looking sternly at him.
“What have I come for? You ask why? What is your faith?” shouted FatherFerapont crazily. “I’ve come here to drive out your visitors, the uncleandevils. I’ve come to see how many have gathered here while I have beenaway. I want to sweep them out with a birch broom.”
“You cast out the evil spirit, but perhaps you are serving him yourself,”Father Païssy went on fearlessly. “And who can say of himself ‘I am holy’?Can you, Father?”
“I am unclean, not holy. I would not sit in an arm‐chair and would nothave them bow down to me as an idol,” thundered Father Ferapont. “Nowadaysfolk destroy the true faith. The dead man, your saint,” he turned to thecrowd, pointing with his finger to the coffin, “did not believe in devils.He gave medicine to keep off the devils. And so they have become as commonas spiders in the corners. And now he has begun to stink himself. In thatwe see a great sign from God.”
The incident he referred to was this. One of the monks was haunted in hisdreams and, later on, in waking moments, by visions of evil spirits. Whenin the utmost terror he confided this to Father Zossima, the elder hadadvised continual prayer and rigid fasting. But when that was of no use,he advised him, while persisting in prayer and fasting, to take a specialmedicine. Many persons were shocked at the time and wagged their heads asthey talked over it—and most of all Father Ferapont, to whom some of thecensorious had hastened to report this “extraordinary” counsel on the partof the elder.
“Go away, Father!” said Father Païssy, in a commanding voice, “it’s notfor man to judge but for God. Perhaps we see here a ‘sign’ which neitheryou, nor I, nor any one of us is able to comprehend. Go, Father, and donot trouble the flock!” he repeated impressively.
“He did not keep the fasts according to the rule and therefore the signhas come. That is clear and it’s a sin to hide it,” the fanatic, carriedaway by a zeal that outstripped his reason, would not be quieted. “He wasseduced by sweetmeats, ladies brought them to him in their pockets, hesipped tea, he worshiped his belly, filling it with sweet things and hismind with haughty thoughts.... And for this he is put to shame....”
“You speak lightly, Father.” Father Païssy, too, raised his voice. “Iadmire your fasting and severities, but you speak lightly like somefrivolous youth, fickle and childish. Go away, Father, I command you!”Father Païssy thundered in conclusion.
“I will go,” said Ferapont, seeming somewhat taken aback, but still asbitter. “You learned men! You are so clever you look down upon myhumbleness. I came hither with little learning and here I have forgottenwhat I did know, God Himself has preserved me in my weakness from yoursubtlety.”
Father Païssy stood over him, waiting resolutely. Father Ferapont pausedand, suddenly leaning his cheek on his hand despondently, pronounced in asing‐song voice, looking at the coffin of the dead elder:
“To‐morrow they will sing over him ‘Our Helper and Defender’—a splendidanthem—and over me when I die all they’ll sing will be ‘What earthlyjoy’—a little canticle,” he added with tearful regret. “You are proudand puffed up, this is a vain place!” he shouted suddenly like a madman,and with a wave of his hand he turned quickly and quickly descended thesteps. The crowd awaiting him below wavered; some followed him at once andsome lingered, for the cell was still open, and Father Païssy, followingFather Ferapont on to the steps, stood watching him. But the excited oldfanatic was not completely silenced. Walking twenty steps away, hesuddenly turned towards the setting sun, raised both his arms and, asthough some one had cut him down, fell to the ground with a loud scream.
“My God has conquered! Christ has conquered the setting sun!” he shoutedfrantically, stretching up his hands to the sun, and falling facedownwards on the ground, he sobbed like a little child, shaken by histears and spreading out his arms on the ground. Then all rushed up to him;there were exclamations and sympathetic sobs ... a kind of frenzy seemedto take possession of them all.
“This is the one who is a saint! This is the one who is a holy man!” somecried aloud, losing their fear. “This is he who should be an elder,”others added malignantly.
“He wouldn’t be an elder ... he would refuse ... he wouldn’t serve acursed innovation ... he wouldn’t imitate their foolery,” other voiceschimed in at once. And it is hard to say how far they might have gone, butat that moment the bell rang summoning them to service. All began crossingthemselves at once. Father Ferapont, too, got up and crossing himself wentback to his cell without looking round, still uttering exclamations whichwere utterly incoherent. A few followed him, but the greater numberdispersed, hastening to service. Father Païssy let Father Iosif read inhis place and went down. The frantic outcries of bigots could not shakehim, but his heart was suddenly filled with melancholy for some specialreason and he felt that. He stood still and suddenly wondered, “Why am Isad even to dejection?” and immediately grasped with surprise that hissudden sadness was due to a very small and special cause. In the crowdthronging at the entrance to the cell, he had noticed Alyosha and heremembered that he had felt at once a pang at heart on seeing him. “Canthat boy mean so much to my heart now?” he asked himself, wondering.
At that moment Alyosha passed him, hurrying away, but not in the directionof the church. Their eyes met. Alyosha quickly turned away his eyes anddropped them to the ground, and from the boy’s look alone, Father Païssyguessed what a great change was taking place in him at that moment.
“Have you, too, fallen into temptation?” cried Father Païssy. “Can you bewith those of little faith?” he added mournfully.
Alyosha stood still and gazed vaguely at Father Païssy, but quickly turnedhis eyes away again and again looked on the ground. He stood sideways anddid not turn his face to Father Païssy, who watched him attentively.
“Where are you hastening? The bell calls to service,” he asked again, butagain Alyosha gave no answer.
“Are you leaving the hermitage? What, without asking leave, without askinga blessing?”
Alyosha suddenly gave a wry smile, cast a strange, very strange, look atthe Father to whom his former guide, the former sovereign of his heart andmind, his beloved elder, had confided him as he lay dying. And suddenly,still without speaking, waved his hand, as though not caring even to berespectful, and with rapid steps walked towards the gates away from thehermitage.
“You will come back again!” murmured Father Païssy, looking after him withsorrowful surprise.


Chapter II. A Critical Moment

Father Païssy, of course, was not wrong when he decided that his “dearboy” would come back again. Perhaps indeed, to some extent, he penetratedwith insight into the true meaning of Alyosha’s spiritual condition. Yet Imust frankly own that it would be very difficult for me to give a clearaccount of that strange, vague moment in the life of the young hero I loveso much. To Father Païssy’s sorrowful question, “Are you too with those oflittle faith?” I could of course confidently answer for Alyosha, “No, heis not with those of little faith. Quite the contrary.” Indeed, all histrouble came from the fact that he was of great faith. But still thetrouble was there and was so agonizing that even long afterwards Alyoshathought of that sorrowful day as one of the bitterest and most fatal daysof his life. If the question is asked: “Could all his grief anddisturbance have been only due to the fact that his elder’s body had shownsigns of premature decomposition instead of at once performing miracles?”I must answer without beating about the bush, “Yes, it certainly was.” Iwould only beg the reader not to be in too great a hurry to laugh at myyoung hero’s pure heart. I am far from intending to apologize for him orto justify his innocent faith on the ground of his youth, or the littleprogress he had made in his studies, or any such reason. I must declare,on the contrary, that I have genuine respect for the qualities of hisheart. No doubt a youth who received impressions cautiously, whose lovewas lukewarm, and whose mind was too prudent for his age and so of littlevalue, such a young man might, I admit, have avoided what happened to myhero. But in some cases it is really more creditable to be carried away byan emotion, however unreasonable, which springs from a great love, than tobe unmoved. And this is even truer in youth, for a young man who is alwayssensible is to be suspected and is of little worth—that’s my opinion!
“But,” reasonable people will exclaim perhaps, “every young man cannotbelieve in such a superstition and your hero is no model for others.”
To this I reply again, “Yes! my hero had faith, a faith holy andsteadfast, but still I am not going to apologize for him.”
Though I declared above, and perhaps too hastily, that I should notexplain or justify my hero, I see that some explanation is necessary forthe understanding of the rest of my story. Let me say then, it was not aquestion of miracles. There was no frivolous and impatient expectation ofmiracles in his mind. And Alyosha needed no miracles at the time, for thetriumph of some preconceived idea—oh, no, not at all—what he saw beforeall was one figure—the figure of his beloved elder, the figure of thatholy man whom he revered with such adoration. The fact is that all thelove that lay concealed in his pure young heart for every one andeverything had, for the past year, been concentrated—and perhaps wronglyso—on one being, his beloved elder. It is true that being had for so longbeen accepted by him as his ideal, that all his young strength and energycould not but turn towards that ideal, even to the forgetting at themoment “of every one and everything.” He remembered afterwards how, onthat terrible day, he had entirely forgotten his brother Dmitri, aboutwhom he had been so anxious and troubled the day before; he had forgotten,too, to take the two hundred roubles to Ilusha’s father, though he had sowarmly intended to do so the preceding evening. But again it was notmiracles he needed but only “the higher justice” which had been in hisbelief outraged by the blow that had so suddenly and cruelly wounded hisheart. And what does it signify that this “justice” looked for by Alyoshainevitably took the shape of miracles to be wrought immediately by theashes of his adored teacher? Why, every one in the monastery cherished thesame thought and the same hope, even those whose intellects Alyosharevered, Father Païssy himself, for instance. And so Alyosha, untroubledby doubts, clothed his dreams too in the same form as all the rest. And awhole year of life in the monastery had formed the habit of thisexpectation in his heart. But it was justice, justice, he thirsted for,not simply miracles.
And now the man who should, he believed, have been exalted above every onein the whole world, that man, instead of receiving the glory that was hisdue, was suddenly degraded and dishonored! What for? Who had judged him?Who could have decreed this? Those were the questions that wrung hisinexperienced and virginal heart. He could not endure withoutmortification, without resentment even, that the holiest of holy menshould have been exposed to the jeering and spiteful mockery of thefrivolous crowd so inferior to him. Even had there been no miracles, hadthere been nothing marvelous to justify his hopes, why this indignity, whythis humiliation, why this premature decay, “in excess of nature,” as thespiteful monks said? Why this “sign from heaven,” which they sotriumphantly acclaimed in company with Father Ferapont, and why did theybelieve they had gained the right to acclaim it? Where is the finger ofProvidence? Why did Providence hide its face “at the most critical moment”(so Alyosha thought it), as though voluntarily submitting to the blind,dumb, pitiless laws of nature?
That was why Alyosha’s heart was bleeding, and, of course, as I have saidalready, the sting of it all was that the man he loved above everything onearth should be put to shame and humiliated! This murmuring may have beenshallow and unreasonable in my hero, but I repeat again for the thirdtime—and am prepared to admit that it might be difficult to defend myfeeling—I am glad that my hero showed himself not too reasonable at thatmoment, for any man of sense will always come back to reason in time, but,if love does not gain the upper hand in a boy’s heart at such anexceptional moment, when will it? I will not, however, omit to mentionsomething strange, which came for a time to the surface of Alyosha’s mindat this fatal and obscure moment. This new something was the harassingimpression left by the conversation with Ivan, which now persistentlyhaunted Alyosha’s mind. At this moment it haunted him. Oh, it was not thatsomething of the fundamental, elemental, so to speak, faith of his soulhad been shaken. He loved his God and believed in Him steadfastly, thoughhe was suddenly murmuring against Him. Yet a vague but tormenting and evilimpression left by his conversation with Ivan the day before, suddenlyrevived again now in his soul and seemed forcing its way to the surface ofhis consciousness.
It had begun to get dusk when Rakitin, crossing the pine copse from thehermitage to the monastery, suddenly noticed Alyosha, lying face downwardson the ground under a tree, not moving and apparently asleep. He went upand called him by his name.
“You here, Alexey? Can you have—” he began wondering but broke off. He hadmeant to say, “Can you have come to this?”
Alyosha did not look at him, but from a slight movement Rakitin at oncesaw that he heard and understood him.
“What’s the matter?” he went on; but the surprise in his face graduallypassed into a smile that became more and more ironical.
“I say, I’ve been looking for you for the last two hours. You suddenlydisappeared. What are you about? What foolery is this? You might just lookat me...”
Alyosha raised his head, sat up and leaned his back against the tree. Hewas not crying, but there was a look of suffering and irritability in hisface. He did not look at Rakitin, however, but looked away to one side ofhim.
“Do you know your face is quite changed? There’s none of your famousmildness to be seen in it. Are you angry with some one? Have they beenill‐treating you?”
“Let me alone,” said Alyosha suddenly, with a weary gesture of his hand,still looking away from him.
“Oho! So that’s how we are feeling! So you can shout at people like othermortals. That is a come‐down from the angels. I say, Alyosha, you havesurprised me, do you hear? I mean it. It’s long since I’ve been surprisedat anything here. I always took you for an educated man....”
Alyosha at last looked at him, but vaguely, as though scarcelyunderstanding what he said.
“Can you really be so upset simply because your old man has begun tostink? You don’t mean to say you seriously believed that he was going towork miracles?” exclaimed Rakitin, genuinely surprised again.
“I believed, I believe, I want to believe, and I will believe, what moredo you want?” cried Alyosha irritably.
“Nothing at all, my boy. Damn it all! why, no schoolboy of thirteenbelieves in that now. But there.... So now you are in a temper with yourGod, you are rebelling against Him; He hasn’t given promotion, He hasn’tbestowed the order of merit! Eh, you are a set!”
Alyosha gazed a long while with his eyes half closed at Rakitin, and therewas a sudden gleam in his eyes ... but not of anger with Rakitin.
“I am not rebelling against my God; I simply ‘don’t accept His world.’ ”Alyosha suddenly smiled a forced smile.
“How do you mean, you don’t accept the world?” Rakitin thought a momentover his answer. “What idiocy is this?”
Alyosha did not answer.
“Come, enough nonsense, now to business. Have you had anything to eat to‐day?”
“I don’t remember.... I think I have.”
“You need keeping up, to judge by your face. It makes one sorry to look atyou. You didn’t sleep all night either, I hear, you had a meeting inthere. And then all this bobbery afterwards. Most likely you’ve hadnothing to eat but a mouthful of holy bread. I’ve got some sausage in mypocket; I’ve brought it from the town in case of need, only you won’t eatsausage....”
“Give me some.”
“I say! You are going it! Why, it’s a regular mutiny, with barricades!Well, my boy, we must make the most of it. Come to my place.... Ishouldn’t mind a drop of vodka myself, I am tired to death. Vodka is goingtoo far for you, I suppose ... or would you like some?”
“Give me some vodka too.”
“Hullo! You surprise me, brother!” Rakitin looked at him in amazement.“Well, one way or another, vodka or sausage, this is a jolly fine chanceand mustn’t be missed. Come along.”
Alyosha got up in silence and followed Rakitin.
“If your little brother Ivan could see this—wouldn’t he be surprised! Bythe way, your brother Ivan set off to Moscow this morning, did you know?”
“Yes,” answered Alyosha listlessly, and suddenly the image of his brotherDmitri rose before his mind. But only for a minute, and though it remindedhim of something that must not be put off for a moment, some duty, someterrible obligation, even that reminder made no impression on him, did notreach his heart and instantly faded out of his mind and was forgotten.But, a long while afterwards, Alyosha remembered this.
“Your brother Ivan declared once that I was a ‘liberal booby with notalents whatsoever.’ Once you, too, could not resist letting me know I was‘dishonorable.’ Well! I should like to see what your talents and sense ofhonor will do for you now.” This phrase Rakitin finished to himself in awhisper.
“Listen!” he said aloud, “let’s go by the path beyond the monasterystraight to the town. Hm! I ought to go to Madame Hohlakov’s by the way.Only fancy, I’ve written to tell her everything that happened, and wouldyou believe it, she answered me instantly in pencil (the lady has apassion for writing notes) that ‘she would never have expected _suchconduct_ from a man of such a reverend character as Father Zossima.’ Thatwas her very word: ‘conduct.’ She is angry too. Eh, you are a set! Stay!”he cried suddenly again. He suddenly stopped and taking Alyosha by theshoulder made him stop too.
“Do you know, Alyosha,” he peeped inquisitively into his eyes, absorbed ina sudden new thought which had dawned on him, and though he was laughingoutwardly he was evidently afraid to utter that new idea aloud, sodifficult he still found it to believe in the strange and unexpected moodin which he now saw Alyosha. “Alyosha, do you know where we had bettergo?” he brought out at last timidly, and insinuatingly.
“I don’t care ... where you like.”
“Let’s go to Grushenka, eh? Will you come?” pronounced Rakitin at last,trembling with timid suspense.
“Let’s go to Grushenka,” Alyosha answered calmly, at once, and this promptand calm agreement was such a surprise to Rakitin that he almost startedback.
“Well! I say!” he cried in amazement, but seizing Alyosha firmly by thearm he led him along the path, still dreading that he would change hismind.
They walked along in silence, Rakitin was positively afraid to talk.
“And how glad she will be, how delighted!” he muttered, but lapsed intosilence again. And indeed it was not to please Grushenka he was takingAlyosha to her. He was a practical person and never undertook anythingwithout a prospect of gain for himself. His object in this case wastwofold, first a revengeful desire to see “the downfall of the righteous,”and Alyosha’s fall “from the saints to the sinners,” over which he wasalready gloating in his imagination, and in the second place he had inview a certain material gain for himself, of which more will be saidlater.
“So the critical moment has come,” he thought to himself with spitefulglee, “and we shall catch it on the hop, for it’s just what we want.”


Chapter III. An Onion

Grushenka lived in the busiest part of the town, near the cathedralsquare, in a small wooden lodge in the courtyard belonging to the house ofthe widow Morozov. The house was a large stone building of two stories,old and very ugly. The widow led a secluded life with her two unmarriednieces, who were also elderly women. She had no need to let her lodge, butevery one knew that she had taken in Grushenka as a lodger, four yearsbefore, solely to please her kinsman, the merchant Samsonov, who was knownto be the girl’s protector. It was said that the jealous old man’s objectin placing his “favorite” with the widow Morozov was that the old womanshould keep a sharp eye on her new lodger’s conduct. But this sharp eyesoon proved to be unnecessary, and in the end the widow Morozov seldom metGrushenka and did not worry her by looking after her in any way. It istrue that four years had passed since the old man had brought the slim,delicate, shy, timid, dreamy, and sad girl of eighteen from the chief townof the province, and much had happened since then. Little was known of thegirl’s history in the town and that little was vague. Nothing more hadbeen learnt during the last four years, even after many persons had becomeinterested in the beautiful young woman into whom Agrafena Alexandrovnahad meanwhile developed. There were rumors that she had been at seventeenbetrayed by some one, some sort of officer, and immediately afterwardsabandoned by him. The officer had gone away and afterwards married, whileGrushenka had been left in poverty and disgrace. It was said, however,that though Grushenka had been raised from destitution by the old man,Samsonov, she came of a respectable family belonging to the clericalclass, that she was the daughter of a deacon or something of the sort.
And now after four years the sensitive, injured and pathetic little orphanhad become a plump, rosy beauty of the Russian type, a woman of bold anddetermined character, proud and insolent. She had a good head forbusiness, was acquisitive, saving and careful, and by fair means or foulhad succeeded, it was said, in amassing a little fortune. There was onlyone point on which all were agreed. Grushenka was not easily to beapproached and except her aged protector there had not been one man whocould boast of her favors during those four years. It was a positive fact,for there had been a good many, especially during the last two years, whohad attempted to obtain those favors. But all their efforts had been invain and some of these suitors had been forced to beat an undignified andeven comic retreat, owing to the firm and ironical resistance they metfrom the strong‐willed young person. It was known, too, that the youngperson had, especially of late, been given to what is called“speculation,” and that she had shown marked abilities in that direction,so that many people began to say that she was no better than a Jew. It wasnot that she lent money on interest, but it was known, for instance, thatshe had for some time past, in partnership with old Karamazov, actuallyinvested in the purchase of bad debts for a trifle, a tenth of theirnominal value, and afterwards had made out of them ten times their value.
The old widower Samsonov, a man of large fortune, was stingy andmerciless. He tyrannized over his grown‐up sons, but, for the last yearduring which he had been ill and lost the use of his swollen legs, he hadfallen greatly under the influence of his protégée, whom he had at firstkept strictly and in humble surroundings, “on Lenten fare,” as the witssaid at the time. But Grushenka had succeeded in emancipating herself,while she established in him a boundless belief in her fidelity. The oldman, now long since dead, had had a large business in his day and was alsoa noteworthy character, miserly and hard as flint. Though Grushenka’s holdupon him was so strong that he could not live without her (it had been soespecially for the last two years), he did not settle any considerablefortune on her and would not have been moved to do so, if she hadthreatened to leave him. But he had presented her with a small sum, andeven that was a surprise to every one when it became known.
“You are a wench with brains,” he said to her, when he gave her eightthousand roubles, “and you must look after yourself, but let me tell youthat except your yearly allowance as before, you’ll get nothing more fromme to the day of my death, and I’ll leave you nothing in my will either.”
And he kept his word; he died and left everything to his sons, whom, withtheir wives and children, he had treated all his life as servants.Grushenka was not even mentioned in his will. All this became knownafterwards. He helped Grushenka with his advice to increase her capitaland put business in her way.
When Fyodor Pavlovitch, who first came into contact with Grushenka over apiece of speculation, ended to his own surprise by falling madly in lovewith her, old Samsonov, gravely ill as he was, was immensely amused. It isremarkable that throughout their whole acquaintance Grushenka wasabsolutely and spontaneously open with the old man, and he seems to havebeen the only person in the world with whom she was so. Of late, whenDmitri too had come on the scene with his love, the old man left offlaughing. On the contrary, he once gave Grushenka a stern and earnestpiece of advice.
“If you have to choose between the two, father or son, you’d better choosethe old man, if only you make sure the old scoundrel will marry you andsettle some fortune on you beforehand. But don’t keep on with the captain,you’ll get no good out of that.”
These were the very words of the old profligate, who felt already that hisdeath was not far off and who actually died five months later.
I will note, too, in passing, that although many in our town knew of thegrotesque and monstrous rivalry of the Karamazovs, father and son, theobject of which was Grushenka, scarcely any one understood what reallyunderlay her attitude to both of them. Even Grushenka’s two servants(after the catastrophe of which we will speak later) testified in courtthat she received Dmitri Fyodorovitch simply from fear because “hethreatened to murder her.” These servants were an old cook, invalidish andalmost deaf, who came from Grushenka’s old home, and her granddaughter, asmart young girl of twenty, who performed the duties of a maid. Grushenkalived very economically and her surroundings were anything but luxurious.Her lodge consisted of three rooms furnished with mahogany furniture inthe fashion of 1820, belonging to her landlady.
It was quite dark when Rakitin and Alyosha entered her rooms, yet theywere not lighted up. Grushenka was lying down in her drawing‐room on thebig, hard, clumsy sofa, with a mahogany back. The sofa was covered withshabby and ragged leather. Under her head she had two white down pillowstaken from her bed. She was lying stretched out motionless on her backwith her hands behind her head. She was dressed as though expecting someone, in a black silk dress, with a dainty lace fichu on her head, whichwas very becoming. Over her shoulders was thrown a lace shawl pinned witha massive gold brooch. She certainly was expecting some one. She lay asthough impatient and weary, her face rather pale and her lips and eyeshot, restlessly tapping the arm of the sofa with the tip of her rightfoot. The appearance of Rakitin and Alyosha caused a slight excitement.From the hall they could hear Grushenka leap up from the sofa and cry outin a frightened voice, “Who’s there?” But the maid met the visitors and atonce called back to her mistress.
“It’s not he, it’s nothing, only other visitors.”
“What can be the matter?” muttered Rakitin, leading Alyosha into thedrawing‐room.
Grushenka was standing by the sofa as though still alarmed. A thick coilof her dark brown hair escaped from its lace covering and fell on herright shoulder, but she did not notice it and did not put it back till shehad gazed at her visitors and recognized them.
“Ah, it’s you, Rakitin? You quite frightened me. Whom have you brought?Who is this with you? Good heavens, you have brought him!” she exclaimed,recognizing Alyosha.
“Do send for candles!” said Rakitin, with the free‐and‐easy air of a mostintimate friend, who is privileged to give orders in the house.
“Candles ... of course, candles.... Fenya, fetch him a candle.... Well,you have chosen a moment to bring him!” she exclaimed again, noddingtowards Alyosha, and turning to the looking‐glass she began quicklyfastening up her hair with both hands. She seemed displeased.
“Haven’t I managed to please you?” asked Rakitin, instantly almostoffended.
“You frightened me, Rakitin, that’s what it is.” Grushenka turned with asmile to Alyosha. “Don’t be afraid of me, my dear Alyosha, you cannotthink how glad I am to see you, my unexpected visitor. But you frightenedme, Rakitin, I thought it was Mitya breaking in. You see, I deceived himjust now, I made him promise to believe me and I told him a lie. I toldhim that I was going to spend the evening with my old man, Kuzma Kuzmitch,and should be there till late counting up his money. I always spend onewhole evening a week with him making up his accounts. We lock ourselves inand he counts on the reckoning beads while I sit and put things down inthe book. I am the only person he trusts. Mitya believes that I am there,but I came back and have been sitting locked in here, expecting some news.How was it Fenya let you in? Fenya, Fenya, run out to the gate, open itand look about whether the captain is to be seen! Perhaps he is hiding andspying, I am dreadfully frightened.”
“There’s no one there, Agrafena Alexandrovna, I’ve just looked out, I keeprunning to peep through the crack, I am in fear and trembling myself.”
“Are the shutters fastened, Fenya? And we must draw the curtains—that’sbetter!” She drew the heavy curtains herself. “He’d rush in at once if hesaw a light. I am afraid of your brother Mitya to‐day, Alyosha.”
Grushenka spoke aloud, and, though she was alarmed, she seemed very happyabout something.
“Why are you so afraid of Mitya to‐day?” inquired Rakitin. “I should havethought you were not timid with him, you’d twist him round your littlefinger.”
“I tell you, I am expecting news, priceless news, so I don’t want Mitya atall. And he didn’t believe, I feel he didn’t, that I should stay at KuzmaKuzmitch’s. He must be in his ambush now, behind Fyodor Pavlovitch’s, inthe garden, watching for me. And if he’s there, he won’t come here, somuch the better! But I really have been to Kuzma Kuzmitch’s, Mityaescorted me there. I told him I should stay there till midnight, and Iasked him to be sure to come at midnight to fetch me home. He went awayand I sat ten minutes with Kuzma Kuzmitch and came back here again. Ugh, Iwas afraid, I ran for fear of meeting him.”
“And why are you so dressed up? What a curious cap you’ve got on!”
“How curious you are yourself, Rakitin! I tell you, I am expecting amessage. If the message comes, I shall fly, I shall gallop away and youwill see no more of me. That’s why I am dressed up, so as to be ready.”
“And where are you flying to?”
“If you know too much, you’ll get old too soon.”
“Upon my word! You are highly delighted ... I’ve never seen you like thisbefore. You are dressed up as if you were going to a ball.” Rakitin lookedher up and down.
“Much you know about balls.”
“And do you know much about them?”
“I have seen a ball. The year before last, Kuzma Kuzmitch’s son wasmarried and I looked on from the gallery. Do you suppose I want to betalking to you, Rakitin, while a prince like this is standing here. Such avisitor! Alyosha, my dear boy, I gaze at you and can’t believe my eyes.Good heavens, can you have come here to see me! To tell you the truth, Inever had a thought of seeing you and I didn’t think that you would evercome and see me. Though this is not the moment now, I am awfully glad tosee you. Sit down on the sofa, here, that’s right, my bright young moon. Ireally can’t take it in even now.... Eh, Rakitin, if only you had broughthim yesterday or the day before! But I am glad as it is! Perhaps it’sbetter he has come now, at such a moment, and not the day beforeyesterday.”
She gayly sat down beside Alyosha on the sofa, looking at him withpositive delight. And she really was glad, she was not lying when she saidso. Her eyes glowed, her lips laughed, but it was a good‐hearted merrylaugh. Alyosha had not expected to see such a kind expression in herface.... He had hardly met her till the day before, he had formed analarming idea of her, and had been horribly distressed the day before bythe spiteful and treacherous trick she had played on Katerina Ivanovna. Hewas greatly surprised to find her now altogether different from what hehad expected. And, crushed as he was by his own sorrow, his eyesinvoluntarily rested on her with attention. Her whole manner seemedchanged for the better since yesterday, there was scarcely any trace ofthat mawkish sweetness in her speech, of that voluptuous softness in hermovements. Everything was simple and good‐natured, her gestures wererapid, direct, confiding, but she was greatly excited.
“Dear me, how everything comes together to‐day!” she chattered on again.“And why I am so glad to see you, Alyosha, I couldn’t say myself! If youask me, I couldn’t tell you.”
“Come, don’t you know why you’re glad?” said Rakitin, grinning. “You usedto be always pestering me to bring him, you’d some object, I suppose.”
“I had a different object once, but now that’s over, this is not themoment. I say, I want you to have something nice. I am so good‐naturednow. You sit down, too, Rakitin; why are you standing? You’ve sat downalready? There’s no fear of Rakitin’s forgetting to look after himself.Look, Alyosha, he’s sitting there opposite us, so offended that I didn’task him to sit down before you. Ugh, Rakitin is such a one to takeoffense!” laughed Grushenka. “Don’t be angry, Rakitin, I’m kind to‐day.Why are you so depressed, Alyosha? Are you afraid of me?" She peeped intohis eyes with merry mockery”
“He’s sad. The promotion has not been given,” boomed Rakitin.
“What promotion?”
“His elder stinks.”
“What? You are talking some nonsense, you want to say something nasty. Bequiet, you stupid! Let me sit on your knee, Alyosha, like this.” Shesuddenly skipped forward and jumped, laughing, on his knee, like anestling kitten, with her right arm about his neck. “I’ll cheer you up, mypious boy. Yes, really, will you let me sit on your knee? You won’t beangry? If you tell me, I’ll get off?”
Alyosha did not speak. He sat afraid to move, he heard her words, “If youtell me, I’ll get off,” but he did not answer. But there was nothing inhis heart such as Rakitin, for instance, watching him malignantly from hiscorner, might have expected or fancied. The great grief in his heartswallowed up every sensation that might have been aroused, and, if only hecould have thought clearly at that moment, he would have realized that hehad now the strongest armor to protect him from every lust and temptation.Yet in spite of the vague irresponsiveness of his spiritual condition andthe sorrow that overwhelmed him, he could not help wondering at a new andstrange sensation in his heart. This woman, this “dreadful” woman, had noterror for him now, none of that terror that had stirred in his soul atany passing thought of woman. On the contrary, this woman, dreaded aboveall women, sitting now on his knee, holding him in her arms, aroused inhim now a quite different, unexpected, peculiar feeling, a feeling of theintensest and purest interest without a trace of fear, of his formerterror. That was what instinctively surprised him.
“You’ve talked nonsense enough,” cried Rakitin, “you’d much better give ussome champagne. You owe it me, you know you do!”
“Yes, I really do. Do you know, Alyosha, I promised him champagne on thetop of everything, if he’d bring you? I’ll have some too! Fenya, Fenya,bring us the bottle Mitya left! Look sharp! Though I am so stingy, I’llstand a bottle, not for you, Rakitin, you’re a toadstool, but he is afalcon! And though my heart is full of something very different, so be it,I’ll drink with you. I long for some dissipation.”
“But what is the matter with you? And what is this message, may I ask, oris it a secret?” Rakitin put in inquisitively, doing his best to pretendnot to notice the snubs that were being continually aimed at him.
“Ech, it’s not a secret, and you know it, too,” Grushenka said, in a voicesuddenly anxious, turning her head towards Rakitin, and drawing a littleaway from Alyosha, though she still sat on his knee with her arm round hisneck. “My officer is coming, Rakitin, my officer is coming.”
“I heard he was coming, but is he so near?”
“He is at Mokroe now; he’ll send a messenger from there, so he wrote; Igot a letter from him to‐day. I am expecting the messenger every minute.”
“You don’t say so! Why at Mokroe?”
“That’s a long story, I’ve told you enough.”
“Mitya’ll be up to something now—I say! Does he know or doesn’t he?”
“He know! Of course he doesn’t. If he knew, there would be murder. But Iam not afraid of that now, I am not afraid of his knife. Be quiet,Rakitin, don’t remind me of Dmitri Fyodorovitch, he has bruised my heart.And I don’t want to think of that at this moment. I can think of Alyoshahere, I can look at Alyosha ... smile at me, dear, cheer up, smile at myfoolishness, at my pleasure.... Ah, he’s smiling, he’s smiling! How kindlyhe looks at me! And you know, Alyosha, I’ve been thinking all this timeyou were angry with me, because of the day before yesterday, because ofthat young lady. I was a cur, that’s the truth.... But it’s a good thingit happened so. It was a horrid thing, but a good thing too.” Grushenkasmiled dreamily and a little cruel line showed in her smile. “Mitya toldme that she screamed out that I ‘ought to be flogged.’ I did insult herdreadfully. She sent for me, she wanted to make a conquest of me, to winme over with her chocolate.... No, it’s a good thing it did end likethat.” She smiled again. “But I am still afraid of your being angry.”
“Yes, that’s really true,” Rakitin put in suddenly with genuine surprise.“Alyosha, she is really afraid of a chicken like you.”
“He is a chicken to you, Rakitin ... because you’ve no conscience, that’swhat it is! You see, I love him with all my soul, that’s how it is!Alyosha, do you believe I love you with all my soul?”
“Ah, you shameless woman! She is making you a declaration, Alexey!”
“Well, what of it, I love him!”
“And what about your officer? And the priceless message from Mokroe?”
“That is quite different.”
“That’s a woman’s way of looking at it!”
“Don’t you make me angry, Rakitin.” Grushenka caught him up hotly. “Thisis quite different. I love Alyosha in a different way. It’s true, Alyosha,I had sly designs on you before. For I am a horrid, violent creature. Butat other times I’ve looked upon you, Alyosha, as my conscience. I’ve keptthinking ‘how any one like that must despise a nasty thing like me.’ Ithought that the day before yesterday, as I ran home from the younglady’s. I have thought of you a long time in that way, Alyosha, and Mityaknows, I’ve talked to him about it. Mitya understands. Would you believeit, I sometimes look at you and feel ashamed, utterly ashamed ofmyself.... And how, and since when, I began to think about you like that,I can’t say, I don’t remember....”
Fenya came in and put a tray with an uncorked bottle and three glasses ofchampagne on the table.
“Here’s the champagne!” cried Rakitin. “You’re excited, AgrafenaAlexandrovna, and not yourself. When you’ve had a glass of champagne,you’ll be ready to dance. Eh, they can’t even do that properly,” he added,looking at the bottle. “The old woman’s poured it out in the kitchen andthe bottle’s been brought in warm and without a cork. Well, let me havesome, anyway.”
He went up to the table, took a glass, emptied it at one gulp and pouredhimself out another.
“One doesn’t often stumble upon champagne,” he said, licking his lips.“Now, Alyosha, take a glass, show what you can do! What shall we drink to?The gates of paradise? Take a glass, Grushenka, you drink to the gates ofparadise, too.”
“What gates of paradise?”
She took a glass, Alyosha took his, tasted it and put it back.
“No, I’d better not,” he smiled gently.
“And you bragged!” cried Rakitin.
“Well, if so, I won’t either,” chimed in Grushenka, “I really don’t wantany. You can drink the whole bottle alone, Rakitin. If Alyosha has some, Iwill.”
“What touching sentimentality!” said Rakitin tauntingly; “and she’ssitting on his knee, too! He’s got something to grieve over, but what’sthe matter with you? He is rebelling against his God and ready to eatsausage....”
“How so?”
“His elder died to‐day, Father Zossima, the saint.”
“So Father Zossima is dead,” cried Grushenka. “Good God, I did not know!”She crossed herself devoutly. “Goodness, what have I been doing, sittingon his knee like this at such a moment!” She started up as though indismay, instantly slipped off his knee and sat down on the sofa.
Alyosha bent a long wondering look upon her and a light seemed to dawn inhis face.
“Rakitin,” he said suddenly, in a firm and loud voice; “don’t taunt mewith having rebelled against God. I don’t want to feel angry with you, soyou must be kinder, too, I’ve lost a treasure such as you have never had,and you cannot judge me now. You had much better look at her—do you seehow she has pity on me? I came here to find a wicked soul—I felt drawn toevil because I was base and evil myself, and I’ve found a true sister, Ihave found a treasure—a loving heart. She had pity on me just now....Agrafena Alexandrovna, I am speaking of you. You’ve raised my soul fromthe depths.”
Alyosha’s lips were quivering and he caught his breath.
“She has saved you, it seems,” laughed Rakitin spitefully. “And she meantto get you in her clutches, do you realize that?”
“Stay, Rakitin.” Grushenka jumped up. “Hush, both of you. Now I’ll tellyou all about it. Hush, Alyosha, your words make me ashamed, for I am badand not good—that’s what I am. And you hush, Rakitin, because you aretelling lies. I had the low idea of trying to get him in my clutches, butnow you are lying, now it’s all different. And don’t let me hear anythingmore from you, Rakitin.”
All this Grushenka said with extreme emotion.
“They are both crazy,” said Rakitin, looking at them with amazement. “Ifeel as though I were in a madhouse. They’re both getting so feeblethey’ll begin crying in a minute.”
“I shall begin to cry, I shall,” repeated Grushenka. “He called me hissister and I shall never forget that. Only let me tell you, Rakitin,though I am bad, I did give away an onion.”
“An onion? Hang it all, you really are crazy.”
Rakitin wondered at their enthusiasm. He was aggrieved and annoyed, thoughhe might have reflected that each of them was just passing through aspiritual crisis such as does not come often in a lifetime. But thoughRakitin was very sensitive about everything that concerned himself, he wasvery obtuse as regards the feelings and sensations of others—partly fromhis youth and inexperience, partly from his intense egoism.
“You see, Alyosha,” Grushenka turned to him with a nervous laugh. “I wasboasting when I told Rakitin I had given away an onion, but it’s not toboast I tell you about it. It’s only a story, but it’s a nice story. Iused to hear it when I was a child from Matryona, my cook, who is stillwith me. It’s like this. Once upon a time there was a peasant woman and avery wicked woman she was. And she died and did not leave a single gooddeed behind. The devils caught her and plunged her into the lake of fire.So her guardian angel stood and wondered what good deed of hers he couldremember to tell to God; ‘She once pulled up an onion in her garden,’ saidhe, ‘and gave it to a beggar woman.’ And God answered: ‘You take thatonion then, hold it out to her in the lake, and let her take hold and bepulled out. And if you can pull her out of the lake, let her come toParadise, but if the onion breaks, then the woman must stay where she is.’The angel ran to the woman and held out the onion to her. ‘Come,’ said he,‘catch hold and I’ll pull you out.’ And he began cautiously pulling herout. He had just pulled her right out, when the other sinners in the lake,seeing how she was being drawn out, began catching hold of her so as to bepulled out with her. But she was a very wicked woman and she began kickingthem. ‘I’m to be pulled out, not you. It’s my onion, not yours.’ As soonas she said that, the onion broke. And the woman fell into the lake andshe is burning there to this day. So the angel wept and went away. Sothat’s the story, Alyosha; I know it by heart, for I am that wicked womanmyself. I boasted to Rakitin that I had given away an onion, but to youI’ll say: ‘I’ve done nothing but give away one onion all my life, that’sthe only good deed I’ve done.’ So don’t praise me, Alyosha, don’t think megood, I am bad, I am a wicked woman and you make me ashamed if you praiseme. Eh, I must confess everything. Listen, Alyosha. I was so anxious toget hold of you that I promised Rakitin twenty‐five roubles if he wouldbring you to me. Stay, Rakitin, wait!”
She went with rapid steps to the table, opened a drawer, pulled out apurse and took from it a twenty‐five rouble note.
“What nonsense! What nonsense!” cried Rakitin, disconcerted.
“Take it. Rakitin, I owe it you, there’s no fear of your refusing it, youasked for it yourself.” And she threw the note to him.
“Likely I should refuse it,” boomed Rakitin, obviously abashed, butcarrying off his confusion with a swagger. “That will come in very handy;fools are made for wise men’s profit.”
“And now hold your tongue, Rakitin, what I am going to say now is not foryour ears. Sit down in that corner and keep quiet. You don’t like us, sohold your tongue.”
“What should I like you for?” Rakitin snarled, not concealing his ill‐humor. He put the twenty‐five rouble note in his pocket and he feltashamed at Alyosha’s seeing it. He had reckoned on receiving his paymentlater, without Alyosha’s knowing of it, and now, feeling ashamed, he losthis temper. Till that moment he had thought it discreet not to contradictGrushenka too flatly in spite of her snubbing, since he had something toget out of her. But now he, too, was angry:
“One loves people for some reason, but what have either of you done forme?”
“You should love people without a reason, as Alyosha does.”
“How does he love you? How has he shown it, that you make such a fussabout it?”
Grushenka was standing in the middle of the room; she spoke with heat andthere were hysterical notes in her voice.
“Hush, Rakitin, you know nothing about us! And don’t dare to speak to melike that again. How dare you be so familiar! Sit in that corner and bequiet, as though you were my footman! And now, Alyosha, I’ll tell you thewhole truth, that you may see what a wretch I am! I am not talking toRakitin, but to you. I wanted to ruin you, Alyosha, that’s the holy truth;I quite meant to. I wanted to so much, that I bribed Rakitin to bring you.And why did I want to do such a thing? You knew nothing about it, Alyosha,you turned away from me; if you passed me, you dropped your eyes. And I’velooked at you a hundred times before to‐day; I began asking every oneabout you. Your face haunted my heart. ‘He despises me,’ I thought; ‘hewon’t even look at me.’ And I felt it so much at last that I wondered atmyself for being so frightened of a boy. I’ll get him in my clutches andlaugh at him. I was full of spite and anger. Would you believe it, nobodyhere dares talk or think of coming to Agrafena Alexandrovna with any evilpurpose. Old Kuzma is the only man I have anything to do with here; I wasbound and sold to him; Satan brought us together, but there has been noone else. But looking at you, I thought, I’ll get him in my clutches andlaugh at him. You see what a spiteful cur I am, and you called me yoursister! And now that man who wronged me has come; I sit here waiting for amessage from him. And do you know what that man has been to me? Five yearsago, when Kuzma brought me here, I used to shut myself up, that no onemight have sight or sound of me. I was a silly slip of a girl; I used tosit here sobbing; I used to lie awake all night, thinking: ‘Where is henow, the man who wronged me? He is laughing at me with another woman, mostlikely. If only I could see him, if I could meet him again, I’d pay himout, I’d pay him out!’ At night I used to lie sobbing into my pillow inthe dark, and I used to brood over it; I used to tear my heart on purposeand gloat over my anger. ‘I’ll pay him out, I’ll pay him out!’ That’s whatI used to cry out in the dark. And when I suddenly thought that I shouldreally do nothing to him, and that he was laughing at me then, or perhapshad utterly forgotten me, I would fling myself on the floor, melt intohelpless tears, and lie there shaking till dawn. In the morning I wouldget up more spiteful than a dog, ready to tear the whole world to pieces.And then what do you think? I began saving money, I became hard‐hearted,grew stout—grew wiser, would you say? No, no one in the whole world seesit, no one knows it, but when night comes on, I sometimes lie as I didfive years ago, when I was a silly girl, clenching my teeth and crying allnight, thinking, ‘I’ll pay him out, I’ll pay him out!’ Do you hear? Wellthen, now you understand me. A month ago a letter came to me—he wascoming, he was a widower, he wanted to see me. It took my breath away;then I suddenly thought: ‘If he comes and whistles to call me, I shallcreep back to him like a beaten dog.’ I couldn’t believe myself. Am I soabject? Shall I run to him or not? And I’ve been in such a rage withmyself all this month that I am worse than I was five years ago. Do yousee now, Alyosha, what a violent, vindictive creature I am? I have shownyou the whole truth! I played with Mitya to keep me from running to thatother. Hush, Rakitin, it’s not for you to judge me, I am not speaking toyou. Before you came in, I was lying here waiting, brooding, deciding mywhole future life, and you can never know what was in my heart. Yes,Alyosha, tell your young lady not to be angry with me for what happenedthe day before yesterday.... Nobody in the whole world knows what I amgoing through now, and no one ever can know.... For perhaps I shall take aknife with me to‐day, I can’t make up my mind ...”
And at this “tragic” phrase Grushenka broke down, hid her face in herhands, flung herself on the sofa pillows, and sobbed like a little child.
Alyosha got up and went to Rakitin.
“Misha,” he said, “don’t be angry. She wounded you, but don’t be angry.You heard what she said just now? You mustn’t ask too much of humanendurance, one must be merciful.”
Alyosha said this at the instinctive prompting of his heart. He feltobliged to speak and he turned to Rakitin. If Rakitin had not been there,he would have spoken to the air. But Rakitin looked at him ironically andAlyosha stopped short.
“You were so primed up with your elder’s teaching last night that now youhave to let it off on me, Alexey, man of God!” said Rakitin, with a smileof hatred.
“Don’t laugh, Rakitin, don’t smile, don’t talk of the dead—he was betterthan any one in the world!” cried Alyosha, with tears in his voice. “Ididn’t speak to you as a judge but as the lowest of the judged. What am Ibeside her? I came here seeking my ruin, and said to myself, ‘What does itmatter?’ in my cowardliness, but she, after five years in torment, as soonas any one says a word from the heart to her—it makes her forgeteverything, forgive everything, in her tears! The man who has wronged herhas come back, he sends for her and she forgives him everything, andhastens joyfully to meet him and she won’t take a knife with her. Shewon’t! No, I am not like that. I don’t know whether you are, Misha, but Iam not like that. It’s a lesson to me.... She is more loving than we....Have you heard her speak before of what she has just told us? No, youhaven’t; if you had, you’d have understood her long ago ... and the personinsulted the day before yesterday must forgive her, too! She will, whenshe knows ... and she shall know.... This soul is not yet at peace withitself, one must be tender with it ... there may be a treasure in thatsoul....”
Alyosha stopped, because he caught his breath. In spite of his ill‐humorRakitin looked at him with astonishment. He had never expected such atirade from the gentle Alyosha.
“She’s found some one to plead her cause! Why, are you in love with her?Agrafena Alexandrovna, our monk’s really in love with you, you’ve made aconquest!” he cried, with a coarse laugh.
Grushenka lifted her head from the pillow and looked at Alyosha with atender smile shining on her tear‐stained face.
“Let him alone, Alyosha, my cherub; you see what he is, he is not a personfor you to speak to. Mihail Osipovitch,” she turned to Rakitin, “I meantto beg your pardon for being rude to you, but now I don’t want to.Alyosha, come to me, sit down here.” She beckoned to him with a happysmile. “That’s right, sit here. Tell me,” she shook him by the hand andpeeped into his face, smiling, “tell me, do I love that man or not? theman who wronged me, do I love him or not? Before you came, I lay here inthe dark, asking my heart whether I loved him. Decide for me, Alyosha, thetime has come, it shall be as you say. Am I to forgive him or not?”
“But you have forgiven him already,” said Alyosha, smiling.
“Yes, I really have forgiven him,” Grushenka murmured thoughtfully. “Whatan abject heart! To my abject heart!” She snatched up a glass from thetable, emptied it at a gulp, lifted it in the air and flung it on thefloor. The glass broke with a crash. A little cruel line came into hersmile.
“Perhaps I haven’t forgiven him, though,” she said, with a sort of menacein her voice, and she dropped her eyes to the ground as though she weretalking to herself. “Perhaps my heart is only getting ready to forgive. Ishall struggle with my heart. You see, Alyosha, I’ve grown to love mytears in these five years.... Perhaps I only love my resentment, not him...”
“Well, I shouldn’t care to be in his shoes,” hissed Rakitin.
“Well, you won’t be, Rakitin, you’ll never be in his shoes. You shallblack my shoes, Rakitin, that’s the place you are fit for. You’ll neverget a woman like me ... and he won’t either, perhaps ...”
“Won’t he? Then why are you dressed up like that?” said Rakitin, with avenomous sneer.
“Don’t taunt me with dressing up, Rakitin, you don’t know all that is inmy heart! If I choose to tear off my finery, I’ll tear it off at once,this minute,” she cried in a resonant voice. “You don’t know what thatfinery is for, Rakitin! Perhaps I shall see him and say: ‘Have you everseen me look like this before?’ He left me a thin, consumptive cry‐baby ofseventeen. I’ll sit by him, fascinate him and work him up. ‘Do you seewhat I am like now?’ I’ll say to him; ‘well, and that’s enough for you, mydear sir, there’s many a slip twixt the cup and the lip!’ That may be whatthe finery is for, Rakitin.” Grushenka finished with a malicious laugh.“I’m violent and resentful, Alyosha, I’ll tear off my finery, I’ll destroymy beauty, I’ll scorch my face, slash it with a knife, and turn beggar. IfI choose, I won’t go anywhere now to see any one. If I choose, I’ll sendKuzma back all he has ever given me, to‐morrow, and all his money and I’llgo out charing for the rest of my life. You think I wouldn’t do it,Rakitin, that I would not dare to do it? I would, I would, I could do itdirectly, only don’t exasperate me ... and I’ll send him about hisbusiness, I’ll snap my fingers in his face, he shall never see me again!”
She uttered the last words in an hysterical scream, but broke down again,hid her face in her hands, buried it in the pillow and shook with sobs.
Rakitin got up.
“It’s time we were off,” he said, “it’s late, we shall be shut out of themonastery.”
Grushenka leapt up from her place.
“Surely you don’t want to go, Alyosha!” she cried, in mournful surprise.“What are you doing to me? You’ve stirred up my feeling, tortured me, andnow you’ll leave me to face this night alone!”
“He can hardly spend the night with you! Though if he wants to, let him!I’ll go alone,” Rakitin scoffed jeeringly.
“Hush, evil tongue!” Grushenka cried angrily at him; “you never said suchwords to me as he has come to say.”
“What has he said to you so special?” asked Rakitin irritably.
“I can’t say, I don’t know. I don’t know what he said to me, it wentstraight to my heart; he has wrung my heart.... He is the first, the onlyone who has pitied me, that’s what it is. Why did you not come before, youangel?” She fell on her knees before him as though in a sudden frenzy.“I’ve been waiting all my life for some one like you, I knew that some onelike you would come and forgive me. I believed that, nasty as I am, someone would really love me, not only with a shameful love!”
“What have I done to you?” answered Alyosha, bending over her with atender smile, and gently taking her by the hands; “I only gave you anonion, nothing but a tiny little onion, that was all!”
He was moved to tears himself as he said it. At that moment there was asudden noise in the passage, some one came into the hall. Grushenka jumpedup, seeming greatly alarmed. Fenya ran noisily into the room, crying out:
“Mistress, mistress darling, a messenger has galloped up,” she cried,breathless and joyful. “A carriage from Mokroe for you, Timofey thedriver, with three horses, they are just putting in fresh horses.... Aletter, here’s the letter, mistress.”
A letter was in her hand and she waved it in the air all the while shetalked. Grushenka snatched the letter from her and carried it to thecandle. It was only a note, a few lines. She read it in one instant.
“He has sent for me,” she cried, her face white and distorted, with a wansmile; “he whistles! Crawl back, little dog!”
But only for one instant she stood as though hesitating; suddenly theblood rushed to her head and sent a glow to her cheeks.
“I will go,” she cried; “five years of my life! Good‐by! Good‐by, Alyosha,my fate is sealed. Go, go, leave me all of you, don’t let me see youagain! Grushenka is flying to a new life.... Don’t you remember evilagainst me either, Rakitin. I may be going to my death! Ugh! I feel asthough I were drunk!”
She suddenly left them and ran into her bedroom.
“Well, she has no thoughts for us now!” grumbled Rakitin. “Let’s go, or wemay hear that feminine shriek again. I am sick of all these tears andcries.”
Alyosha mechanically let himself be led out. In the yard stood a coveredcart. Horses were being taken out of the shafts, men were running to andfro with a lantern. Three fresh horses were being led in at the open gate.But when Alyosha and Rakitin reached the bottom of the steps, Grushenka’sbedroom window was suddenly opened and she called in a ringing voice afterAlyosha:
“Alyosha, give my greetings to your brother Mitya and tell him not toremember evil against me, though I have brought him misery. And tell him,too, in my words: ‘Grushenka has fallen to a scoundrel, and not to you,noble heart.’ And add, too, that Grushenka loved him only one hour, onlyone short hour she loved him—so let him remember that hour all hislife—say, ‘Grushenka tells you to!’ ”
She ended in a voice full of sobs. The window was shut with a slam.
“H’m, h’m!” growled Rakitin, laughing, “she murders your brother Mitya andthen tells him to remember it all his life! What ferocity!”
Alyosha made no reply, he seemed not to have heard. He walked fast besideRakitin as though in a terrible hurry. He was lost in thought and movedmechanically. Rakitin felt a sudden twinge as though he had been touchedon an open wound. He had expected something quite different by bringingGrushenka and Alyosha together. Something very different from what he hadhoped for had happened.
“He is a Pole, that officer of hers,” he began again, restraining himself;“and indeed he is not an officer at all now. He served in the customs inSiberia, somewhere on the Chinese frontier, some puny little beggar of aPole, I expect. Lost his job, they say. He’s heard now that Grushenka’ssaved a little money, so he’s turned up again—that’s the explanation ofthe mystery.”
Again Alyosha seemed not to hear. Rakitin could not control himself.
“Well, so you’ve saved the sinner?” he laughed spitefully. “Have youturned the Magdalene into the true path? Driven out the seven devils, eh?So you see the miracles you were looking out for just now have come topass!”
“Hush, Rakitin,” Alyosha answered with an aching heart.
“So you despise me now for those twenty‐five roubles? I’ve sold my friend,you think. But you are not Christ, you know, and I am not Judas.”
“Oh, Rakitin, I assure you I’d forgotten about it,” cried Alyosha, “youremind me of it yourself....”
But this was the last straw for Rakitin.
“Damnation take you all and each of you!” he cried suddenly, “why thedevil did I take you up? I don’t want to know you from this time forward.Go alone, there’s your road!”
And he turned abruptly into another street, leaving Alyosha alone in thedark. Alyosha came out of the town and walked across the fields to themonastery.


Chapter IV. Cana Of Galilee

It was very late, according to the monastery ideas, when Alyosha returnedto the hermitage; the door‐keeper let him in by a special entrance. It hadstruck nine o’clock—the hour of rest and repose after a day of suchagitation for all. Alyosha timidly opened the door and went into theelder’s cell where his coffin was now standing. There was no one in thecell but Father Païssy, reading the Gospel in solitude over the coffin,and the young novice Porfiry, who, exhausted by the previous night’sconversation and the disturbing incidents of the day, was sleeping thedeep sound sleep of youth on the floor of the other room. Though FatherPaïssy heard Alyosha come in, he did not even look in his direction.Alyosha turned to the right from the door to the corner, fell on his kneesand began to pray.
His soul was overflowing but with mingled feelings; no single sensationstood out distinctly; on the contrary, one drove out another in a slow,continual rotation. But there was a sweetness in his heart and, strange tosay, Alyosha was not surprised at it. Again he saw that coffin before him,the hidden dead figure so precious to him, but the weeping and poignantgrief of the morning was no longer aching in his soul. As soon as he camein, he fell down before the coffin as before a holy shrine, but joy, joywas glowing in his mind and in his heart. The one window of the cell wasopen, the air was fresh and cool. “So the smell must have become stronger,if they opened the window,” thought Alyosha. But even this thought of thesmell of corruption, which had seemed to him so awful and humiliating afew hours before, no longer made him feel miserable or indignant. He beganquietly praying, but he soon felt that he was praying almost mechanically.Fragments of thought floated through his soul, flashed like stars and wentout again at once, to be succeeded by others. But yet there was reigningin his soul a sense of the wholeness of things—something steadfast andcomforting—and he was aware of it himself. Sometimes he began prayingardently, he longed to pour out his thankfulness and love....
But when he had begun to pray, he passed suddenly to something else, andsank into thought, forgetting both the prayer and what had interrupted it.He began listening to what Father Païssy was reading, but worn out withexhaustion he gradually began to doze.
“_And the third day there was a marriage in Cana of Galilee;_” read FatherPaïssy. “_And the mother of Jesus was there; And both Jesus was called,and his disciples, to the marriage._”
“Marriage? What’s that?... A marriage!” floated whirling through Alyosha’smind. “There is happiness for her, too.... She has gone to the feast....No, she has not taken the knife.... That was only a tragic phrase.... Well... tragic phrases should be forgiven, they must be. Tragic phrasescomfort the heart.... Without them, sorrow would be too heavy for men tobear. Rakitin has gone off to the back alley. As long as Rakitin broodsover his wrongs, he will always go off to the back alley.... But the highroad ... The road is wide and straight and bright as crystal, and the sunis at the end of it.... Ah!... What’s being read?”...
“_And when they wanted wine, the mother of Jesus saith unto him, They haveno wine_” ... Alyosha heard.
“Ah, yes, I was missing that, and I didn’t want to miss it, I love thatpassage: it’s Cana of Galilee, the first miracle.... Ah, that miracle! Ah,that sweet miracle! It was not men’s grief, but their joy Christ visited,He worked His first miracle to help men’s gladness.... ‘He who loves menloves their gladness, too’ ... He was always repeating that, it was one ofhis leading ideas.... ‘There’s no living without joy,’ Mitya says.... Yes,Mitya.... ‘Everything that is true and good is always full offorgiveness,’ he used to say that, too” ...
“_Jesus saith unto her, Woman, what has it to do with thee or me? Minehour is not yet come._
“_His mother saith unto the servants, Whatsoever he saith unto you, doit_” ...
“Do it.... Gladness, the gladness of some poor, very poor, people.... Ofcourse they were poor, since they hadn’t wine enough even at a wedding....The historians write that, in those days, the people living about the Lakeof Gennesaret were the poorest that can possibly be imagined ... andanother great heart, that other great being, His Mother, knew that He hadcome not only to make His great terrible sacrifice. She knew that Hisheart was open even to the simple, artless merrymaking of some obscure andunlearned people, who had warmly bidden Him to their poor wedding. ‘Minehour is not yet come,’ He said, with a soft smile (He must have smiledgently to her). And, indeed, was it to make wine abundant at poor weddingsHe had come down to earth? And yet He went and did as she asked Him....Ah, he is reading again”....
“_Jesus saith unto them, Fill the waterpots with water. And they filledthem up to the brim._
“_And he saith unto them, Draw out now and bear unto the governor of thefeast. And they bare it._
“_When the ruler of the feast had tasted the water that was made wine, andknew not whence it was; (but the servants which drew the water knew;) thegovernor of the feast called the bridegroom,_
“_And saith unto him, Every man at the beginning doth set forth good wine;and when men have well drunk, that which is worse; but thou hast kept thegood wine until now._”
“But what’s this, what’s this? Why is the room growing wider?... Ah, yes... It’s the marriage, the wedding ... yes, of course. Here are theguests, here are the young couple sitting, and the merry crowd and ...Where is the wise governor of the feast? But who is this? Who? Again thewalls are receding.... Who is getting up there from the great table?What!... He here, too? But he’s in the coffin ... but he’s here, too. Hehas stood up, he sees me, he is coming here.... God!”...
Yes, he came up to him, to him, he, the little, thin old man, with tinywrinkles on his face, joyful and laughing softly. There was no coffin now,and he was in the same dress as he had worn yesterday sitting with them,when the visitors had gathered about him. His face was uncovered, his eyeswere shining. How was this, then? He, too, had been called to the feast.He, too, at the marriage of Cana in Galilee....
“Yes, my dear, I am called, too, called and bidden,” he heard a soft voicesaying over him. “Why have you hidden yourself here, out of sight? Youcome and join us too.”
It was his voice, the voice of Father Zossima. And it must be he, since hecalled him!
The elder raised Alyosha by the hand and he rose from his knees.
“We are rejoicing,” the little, thin old man went on. “We are drinking thenew wine, the wine of new, great gladness; do you see how many guests?Here are the bride and bridegroom, here is the wise governor of the feast,he is tasting the new wine. Why do you wonder at me? I gave an onion to abeggar, so I, too, am here. And many here have given only an onioneach—only one little onion.... What are all our deeds? And you, my gentleone, you, my kind boy, you too have known how to give a famished woman anonion to‐day. Begin your work, dear one, begin it, gentle one!... Do yousee our Sun, do you see Him?”
“I am afraid ... I dare not look,” whispered Alyosha.
“Do not fear Him. He is terrible in His greatness, awful in His sublimity,but infinitely merciful. He has made Himself like unto us from love andrejoices with us. He is changing the water into wine that the gladness ofthe guests may not be cut short. He is expecting new guests, He is callingnew ones unceasingly for ever and ever.... There they are bringing newwine. Do you see they are bringing the vessels....”
Something glowed in Alyosha’s heart, something filled it till it ached,tears of rapture rose from his soul.... He stretched out his hands,uttered a cry and waked up.
Again the coffin, the open window, and the soft, solemn, distinct readingof the Gospel. But Alyosha did not listen to the reading. It was strange,he had fallen asleep on his knees, but now he was on his feet, andsuddenly, as though thrown forward, with three firm rapid steps he wentright up to the coffin. His shoulder brushed against Father Païssy withouthis noticing it. Father Païssy raised his eyes for an instant from hisbook, but looked away again at once, seeing that something strange washappening to the boy. Alyosha gazed for half a minute at the coffin, atthe covered, motionless dead man that lay in the coffin, with the ikon onhis breast and the peaked cap with the octangular cross, on his head. Hehad only just been hearing his voice, and that voice was still ringing inhis ears. He was listening, still expecting other words, but suddenly heturned sharply and went out of the cell.
He did not stop on the steps either, but went quickly down; his soul,overflowing with rapture, yearned for freedom, space, openness. The vaultof heaven, full of soft, shining stars, stretched vast and fathomlessabove him. The Milky Way ran in two pale streams from the zenith to thehorizon. The fresh, motionless, still night enfolded the earth. The whitetowers and golden domes of the cathedral gleamed out against the sapphiresky. The gorgeous autumn flowers, in the beds round the house, wereslumbering till morning. The silence of earth seemed to melt into thesilence of the heavens. The mystery of earth was one with the mystery ofthe stars....
Alyosha stood, gazed, and suddenly threw himself down on the earth. He didnot know why he embraced it. He could not have told why he longed soirresistibly to kiss it, to kiss it all. But he kissed it weeping, sobbingand watering it with his tears, and vowed passionately to love it, to loveit for ever and ever. “Water the earth with the tears of your joy and lovethose tears,” echoed in his soul.
What was he weeping over?
Oh! in his rapture he was weeping even over those stars, which wereshining to him from the abyss of space, and “he was not ashamed of thatecstasy.” There seemed to be threads from all those innumerable worlds ofGod, linking his soul to them, and it was trembling all over “in contactwith other worlds.” He longed to forgive every one and for everything, andto beg forgiveness. Oh, not for himself, but for all men, for all and foreverything. “And others are praying for me too,” echoed again in his soul.But with every instant he felt clearly and, as it were, tangibly, thatsomething firm and unshakable as that vault of heaven had entered into hissoul. It was as though some idea had seized the sovereignty of hismind—and it was for all his life and for ever and ever. He had fallen onthe earth a weak boy, but he rose up a resolute champion, and he knew andfelt it suddenly at the very moment of his ecstasy. And never, never, allhis life long, could Alyosha forget that minute.
“Some one visited my soul in that hour,” he used to say afterwards, withimplicit faith in his words.
Within three days he left the monastery in accordance with the words ofhis elder, who had bidden him “sojourn in the world.”



Book VIII. Mitya


Chapter I. Kuzma Samsonov

But Dmitri, to whom Grushenka, flying away to a new life, had left herlast greetings, bidding him remember the hour of her love for ever, knewnothing of what had happened to her, and was at that moment in a conditionof feverish agitation and activity. For the last two days he had been insuch an inconceivable state of mind that he might easily have fallen illwith brain fever, as he said himself afterwards. Alyosha had not been ableto find him the morning before, and Ivan had not succeeded in meeting himat the tavern on the same day. The people at his lodgings, by his orders,concealed his movements.
He had spent those two days literally rushing in all directions,“struggling with his destiny and trying to save himself,” as he expressedit himself afterwards, and for some hours he even made a dash out of thetown on urgent business, terrible as it was to him to lose sight ofGrushenka for a moment. All this was explained afterwards in detail, andconfirmed by documentary evidence; but for the present we will only notethe most essential incidents of those two terrible days immediatelypreceding the awful catastrophe, that broke so suddenly upon him.
Though Grushenka had, it is true, loved him for an hour, genuinely andsincerely, yet she tortured him sometimes cruelly and mercilessly. Theworst of it was that he could never tell what she meant to do. To prevailupon her by force or kindness was also impossible: she would yield tonothing. She would only have become angry and turned away from himaltogether, he knew that well already. He suspected, quite correctly, thatshe, too, was passing through an inward struggle, and was in a state ofextraordinary indecision, that she was making up her mind to something,and unable to determine upon it. And so, not without good reason, hedivined, with a sinking heart, that at moments she must simply hate himand his passion. And so, perhaps, it was, but what was distressingGrushenka he did not understand. For him the whole tormenting question laybetween him and Fyodor Pavlovitch.
Here, we must note, by the way, one certain fact: he was firmly persuadedthat Fyodor Pavlovitch would offer, or perhaps had offered, Grushenkalawful wedlock, and did not for a moment believe that the old voluptuaryhoped to gain his object for three thousand roubles. Mitya had reachedthis conclusion from his knowledge of Grushenka and her character. Thatwas how it was that he could believe at times that all Grushenka’suneasiness rose from not knowing which of them to choose, which was mostto her advantage.
Strange to say, during those days it never occurred to him to think of theapproaching return of the “officer,” that is, of the man who had been sucha fatal influence in Grushenka’s life, and whose arrival she was expectingwith such emotion and dread. It is true that of late Grushenka had beenvery silent about it. Yet he was perfectly aware of a letter she hadreceived a month ago from her seducer, and had heard of it from her ownlips. He partly knew, too, what the letter contained. In a moment of spiteGrushenka had shown him that letter, but to her astonishment he attachedhardly any consequence to it. It would be hard to say why this was.Perhaps, weighed down by all the hideous horror of his struggle with hisown father for this woman, he was incapable of imagining any danger moreterrible, at any rate for the time. He simply did not believe in a suitorwho suddenly turned up again after five years’ disappearance, still lessin his speedy arrival. Moreover, in the “officer’s” first letter which hadbeen shown to Mitya, the possibility of his new rival’s visit was veryvaguely suggested. The letter was very indefinite, high‐flown, and full ofsentimentality. It must be noted that Grushenka had concealed from him thelast lines of the letter, in which his return was alluded to moredefinitely. He had, besides, noticed at that moment, he rememberedafterwards, a certain involuntary proud contempt for this missive fromSiberia on Grushenka’s face. Grushenka told him nothing of what had passedlater between her and this rival; so that by degrees he had completelyforgotten the officer’s existence.
He felt that whatever might come later, whatever turn things might take,his final conflict with Fyodor Pavlovitch was close upon him, and must bedecided before anything else. With a sinking heart he was expecting everymoment Grushenka’s decision, always believing that it would come suddenly,on the impulse of the moment. All of a sudden she would say to him: “Takeme, I’m yours for ever,” and it would all be over. He would seize her andbear her away at once to the ends of the earth. Oh, then he would bear heraway at once, as far, far away as possible; to the farthest end of Russia,if not of the earth, then he would marry her, and settle down with herincognito, so that no one would know anything about them, there, here, oranywhere. Then, oh, then, a new life would begin at once!
Of this different, reformed and “virtuous” life (“it must, it must bevirtuous”) he dreamed feverishly at every moment. He thirsted for thatreformation and renewal. The filthy morass, in which he had sunk of hisown free will, was too revolting to him, and, like very many men in suchcases, he put faith above all in change of place. If only it were not forthese people, if only it were not for these circumstances, if only hecould fly away from this accursed place—he would be altogetherregenerated, would enter on a new path. That was what he believed in, andwhat he was yearning for.
But all this could only be on condition of the first, the _happy_ solutionof the question. There was another possibility, a different and awfulending. Suddenly she might say to him: “Go away. I have just come to termswith Fyodor Pavlovitch. I am going to marry him and don’t want you”—andthen ... but then.... But Mitya did not know what would happen then. Up tothe last hour he didn’t know. That must be said to his credit. He had nodefinite intentions, had planned no crime. He was simply watching andspying in agony, while he prepared himself for the first, happy solutionof his destiny. He drove away any other idea, in fact. But for that endinga quite different anxiety arose, a new, incidental, but yet fatal andinsoluble difficulty presented itself.
If she were to say to him: “I’m yours; take me away,” how could he takeher away? Where had he the means, the money to do it? It was just at thistime that all sources of revenue from Fyodor Pavlovitch, doles which hadgone on without interruption for so many years, ceased. Grushenka hadmoney, of course, but with regard to this Mitya suddenly evincedextraordinary pride; he wanted to carry her away and begin the new lifewith her himself, at his own expense, not at hers. He could not conceiveof taking her money, and the very idea caused him a pang of intenserepulsion. I won’t enlarge on this fact or analyze it here, but confinemyself to remarking that this was his attitude at the moment. All this mayhave arisen indirectly and unconsciously from the secret stings of hisconscience for the money of Katerina Ivanovna that he had dishonestlyappropriated. “I’ve been a scoundrel to one of them, and I shall be ascoundrel again to the other directly,” was his feeling then, as heexplained after: “and when Grushenka knows, she won’t care for such ascoundrel.”
Where then was he to get the means, where was he to get the fateful money?Without it, all would be lost and nothing could be done, “and only becauseI hadn’t the money. Oh, the shame of it!”
To anticipate things: he did, perhaps, know where to get the money, knew,perhaps, where it lay at that moment. I will say no more of this here, asit will all be clear later. But his chief trouble, I must explain howeverobscurely, lay in the fact that to have that sum he knew of, to _have theright_ to take it, he must first restore Katerina Ivanovna’s threethousand—if not, “I’m a common pickpocket, I’m a scoundrel, and I don’twant to begin a new life as a scoundrel,” Mitya decided. And so he made uphis mind to move heaven and earth to return Katerina Ivanovna that threethousand, and that _first of all_. The final stage of this decision, so tosay, had been reached only during the last hours, that is, after his lastinterview with Alyosha, two days before, on the high‐road, on the eveningwhen Grushenka had insulted Katerina Ivanovna, and Mitya, after hearingAlyosha’s account of it, had admitted that he was a scoundrel, and toldhim to tell Katerina Ivanovna so, if it could be any comfort to her. Afterparting from his brother on that night, he had felt in his frenzy that itwould be better “to murder and rob some one than fail to pay my debt toKatya. I’d rather every one thought me a robber and a murderer, I’d rathergo to Siberia than that Katya should have the right to say that I deceivedher and stole her money, and used her money to run away with Grushenka andbegin a new life! That I can’t do!” So Mitya decided, grinding his teeth,and he might well fancy at times that his brain would give way. Butmeanwhile he went on struggling....
Strange to say, though one would have supposed there was nothing left forhim but despair—for what chance had he, with nothing in the world, toraise such a sum?—yet to the very end he persisted in hoping that he wouldget that three thousand, that the money would somehow come to him ofitself, as though it might drop from heaven. That is just how it is withpeople who, like Dmitri, have never had anything to do with money, exceptto squander what has come to them by inheritance without any effort oftheir own, and have no notion how money is obtained. A whirl of the mostfantastic notions took possession of his brain immediately after he hadparted with Alyosha two days before, and threw his thoughts into a tangleof confusion. This is how it was he pitched first on a perfectly wildenterprise. And perhaps to men of that kind in such circumstances the mostimpossible, fantastic schemes occur first, and seem most practical.
He suddenly determined to go to Samsonov, the merchant who was Grushenka’sprotector, and to propose a “scheme” to him, and by means of it to obtainfrom him at once the whole of the sum required. Of the commercial value ofhis scheme he had no doubt, not the slightest, and was only uncertain howSamsonov would look upon his freak, supposing he were to consider it fromany but the commercial point of view. Though Mitya knew the merchant bysight, he was not acquainted with him and had never spoken a word to him.But for some unknown reason he had long entertained the conviction thatthe old reprobate, who was lying at death’s door, would perhaps not at allobject now to Grushenka’s securing a respectable position, and marrying aman “to be depended upon.” And he believed not only that he would notobject, but that this was what he desired, and, if opportunity arose, thathe would be ready to help. From some rumor, or perhaps from some strayword of Grushenka’s, he had gathered further that the old man wouldperhaps prefer him to Fyodor Pavlovitch for Grushenka.
Possibly many of the readers of my novel will feel that in reckoning onsuch assistance, and being ready to take his bride, so to speak, from thehands of her protector, Dmitri showed great coarseness and want ofdelicacy. I will only observe that Mitya looked upon Grushenka’s past assomething completely over. He looked on that past with infinite pity andresolved with all the fervor of his passion that when once Grushenka toldhim she loved him and would marry him, it would mean the beginning of anew Grushenka and a new Dmitri, free from every vice. They would forgiveone another and would begin their lives afresh. As for Kuzma Samsonov,Dmitri looked upon him as a man who had exercised a fateful influence inthat remote past of Grushenka’s, though she had never loved him, and whowas now himself a thing of the past, completely done with, and, so to say,non‐existent. Besides, Mitya hardly looked upon him as a man at all, forit was known to every one in the town that he was only a shattered wreck,whose relations with Grushenka had changed their character and were nowsimply paternal, and that this had been so for a long time.
In any case there was much simplicity on Mitya’s part in all this, for inspite of all his vices, he was a very simple‐hearted man. It was aninstance of this simplicity that Mitya was seriously persuaded that, beingon the eve of his departure for the next world, old Kuzma must sincerelyrepent of his past relations with Grushenka, and that she had no moredevoted friend and protector in the world than this, now harmless old man.
After his conversation with Alyosha, at the cross‐roads, he hardly sleptall night, and at ten o’clock next morning, he was at the house ofSamsonov and telling the servant to announce him. It was a very large andgloomy old house of two stories, with a lodge and outhouses. In the lowerstory lived Samsonov’s two married sons with their families, his oldsister, and his unmarried daughter. In the lodge lived two of his clerks,one of whom also had a large family. Both the lodge and the lower storywere overcrowded, but the old man kept the upper floor to himself, andwould not even let the daughter live there with him, though she waitedupon him, and in spite of her asthma was obliged at certain fixed hours,and at any time he might call her, to run upstairs to him from below.
This upper floor contained a number of large rooms kept purely for show,furnished in the old‐fashioned merchant style, with long monotonous rowsof clumsy mahogany chairs along the walls, with glass chandeliers undershades, and gloomy mirrors on the walls. All these rooms were entirelyempty and unused, for the old man kept to one room, a small, remotebedroom, where he was waited upon by an old servant with a kerchief on herhead, and by a lad, who used to sit on the locker in the passage. Owing tohis swollen legs, the old man could hardly walk at all, and was onlyrarely lifted from his leather arm‐chair, when the old woman supportinghim led him up and down the room once or twice. He was morose and taciturneven with this old woman.
When he was informed of the arrival of the “captain,” he at once refusedto see him. But Mitya persisted and sent his name up again. Samsonovquestioned the lad minutely: What he looked like? Whether he was drunk?Was he going to make a row? The answer he received was: that he was sober,but wouldn’t go away. The old man again refused to see him. Then Mitya,who had foreseen this, and purposely brought pencil and paper with him,wrote clearly on the piece of paper the words: “On most important businessclosely concerning Agrafena Alexandrovna,” and sent it up to the old man.
After thinking a little Samsonov told the lad to take the visitor to thedrawing‐room, and sent the old woman downstairs with a summons to hisyounger son to come upstairs to him at once. This younger son, a man oversix foot and of exceptional physical strength, who was closely‐shaven anddressed in the European style, though his father still wore a kaftan and abeard, came at once without a comment. All the family trembled before thefather. The old man had sent for this giant, not because he was afraid ofthe “captain” (he was by no means of a timorous temper), but in order tohave a witness in case of any emergency. Supported by his son and theservant‐lad, he waddled at last into the drawing‐room. It may be assumedthat he felt considerable curiosity. The drawing‐room in which Mitya wasawaiting him was a vast, dreary room that laid a weight of depression onthe heart. It had a double row of windows, a gallery, marbled walls, andthree immense chandeliers with glass lusters covered with shades.
Mitya was sitting on a little chair at the entrance, awaiting his fatewith nervous impatience. When the old man appeared at the opposite door,seventy feet away, Mitya jumped up at once, and with his long, militarystride walked to meet him. Mitya was well dressed, in a frock‐coat,buttoned up, with a round hat and black gloves in his hands, just as hehad been three days before at the elder’s, at the family meeting with hisfather and brothers. The old man waited for him, standing dignified andunbending, and Mitya felt at once that he had looked him through andthrough as he advanced. Mitya was greatly impressed, too, with Samsonov’simmensely swollen face. His lower lip, which had always been thick, hungdown now, looking like a bun. He bowed to his guest in dignified silence,motioned him to a low chair by the sofa, and, leaning on his son’s arm hebegan lowering himself on to the sofa opposite, groaning painfully, sothat Mitya, seeing his painful exertions, immediately felt remorseful andsensitively conscious of his insignificance in the presence of thedignified person he had ventured to disturb.
“What is it you want of me, sir?” said the old man, deliberately,distinctly, severely, but courteously, when he was at last seated.
Mitya started, leapt up, but sat down again. Then he began at oncespeaking with loud, nervous haste, gesticulating, and in a positivefrenzy. He was unmistakably a man driven into a corner, on the brink ofruin, catching at the last straw, ready to sink if he failed. Old Samsonovprobably grasped all this in an instant, though his face remained cold andimmovable as a statue’s.
“Most honored sir, Kuzma Kuzmitch, you have no doubt heard more than onceof my disputes with my father, Fyodor Pavlovitch Karamazov, who robbed meof my inheritance from my mother ... seeing the whole town is gossipingabout it ... for here every one’s gossiping of what they shouldn’t ... andbesides, it might have reached you through Grushenka ... I beg yourpardon, through Agrafena Alexandrovna ... Agrafena Alexandrovna, the ladyfor whom I have the highest respect and esteem ...”
So Mitya began, and broke down at the first sentence. We will notreproduce his speech word for word, but will only summarize the gist ofit. Three months ago, he said, he had of express intention (Mityapurposely used these words instead of “intentionally”) consulted a lawyerin the chief town of the province, “a distinguished lawyer, KuzmaKuzmitch, Pavel Pavlovitch Korneplodov. You have perhaps heard of him? Aman of vast intellect, the mind of a statesman ... he knows you, too ...spoke of you in the highest terms ...” Mitya broke down again. But thesebreaks did not deter him. He leapt instantly over the gaps, and struggledon and on.
This Korneplodov, after questioning him minutely, and inspecting thedocuments he was able to bring him (Mitya alluded somewhat vaguely tothese documents, and slurred over the subject with special haste),reported that they certainly might take proceedings concerning the villageof Tchermashnya, which ought, he said, to have come to him, Mitya, fromhis mother, and so checkmate the old villain, his father ... “becauseevery door was not closed and justice might still find a loophole.” Infact, he might reckon on an additional sum of six or even seven thousandroubles from Fyodor Pavlovitch, as Tchermashnya was worth, at least,twenty‐five thousand, he might say twenty‐eight thousand, in fact,“thirty, thirty, Kuzma Kuzmitch, and would you believe it, I didn’t getseventeen from that heartless man!” So he, Mitya, had thrown the businessup, for the time, knowing nothing about the law, but on coming here wasstruck dumb by a cross‐claim made upon him (here Mitya went adrift againand again took a flying leap forward), “so will not you, excellent andhonored Kuzma Kuzmitch, be willing to take up all my claims against thatunnatural monster, and pay me a sum down of only three thousand?... Yousee, you cannot, in any case, lose over it. On my honor, my honor, I swearthat. Quite the contrary, you may make six or seven thousand instead ofthree.” Above all, he wanted this concluded that very day.
“I’ll do the business with you at a notary’s, or whatever it is ... infact, I’m ready to do anything.... I’ll hand over all the deeds ...whatever you want, sign anything ... and we could draw up the agreement atonce ... and if it were possible, if it were only possible, that verymorning.... You could pay me that three thousand, for there isn’t acapitalist in this town to compare with you, and so would save me from ...would save me, in fact ... for a good, I might say an honorable action....For I cherish the most honorable feelings for a certain person, whom youknow well, and care for as a father. I would not have come, indeed, if ithad not been as a father. And, indeed, it’s a struggle of three in thisbusiness, for it’s fate—that’s a fearful thing, Kuzma Kuzmitch! A tragedy,Kuzma Kuzmitch, a tragedy! And as you’ve dropped out long ago, it’s a tug‐of‐war between two. I’m expressing it awkwardly, perhaps, but I’m not aliterary man. You see, I’m on the one side, and that monster on the other.So you must choose. It’s either I or the monster. It all lies in yourhands—the fate of three lives, and the happiness of two.... Excuse me, I’mmaking a mess of it, but you understand ... I see from your venerable eyesthat you understand ... and if you don’t understand, I’m done for ... soyou see!”
Mitya broke off his clumsy speech with that, “so you see!” and jumping upfrom his seat, awaited the answer to his foolish proposal. At the lastphrase he had suddenly become hopelessly aware that it had all fallenflat, above all, that he had been talking utter nonsense.
“How strange it is! On the way here it seemed all right, and now it’snothing but nonsense.” The idea suddenly dawned on his despairing mind.All the while he had been talking, the old man sat motionless, watchinghim with an icy expression in his eyes. After keeping him for a moment insuspense, Kuzma Kuzmitch pronounced at last in the most positive andchilling tone:
“Excuse me, we don’t undertake such business.”
Mitya suddenly felt his legs growing weak under him.
“What am I to do now, Kuzma Kuzmitch?” he muttered, with a pale smile. “Isuppose it’s all up with me—what do you think?”
“Excuse me....”
Mitya remained standing, staring motionless. He suddenly noticed amovement in the old man’s face. He started.
“You see, sir, business of that sort’s not in our line,” said the old manslowly. “There’s the court, and the lawyers—it’s a perfect misery. But ifyou like, there is a man here you might apply to.”
“Good heavens! Who is it? You’re my salvation, Kuzma Kuzmitch,” falteredMitya.
“He doesn’t live here, and he’s not here just now. He is a peasant, hedoes business in timber. His name is Lyagavy. He’s been haggling withFyodor Pavlovitch for the last year, over your copse at Tchermashnya. Theycan’t agree on the price, maybe you’ve heard? Now he’s come back again andis staying with the priest at Ilyinskoe, about twelve versts from theVolovya station. He wrote to me, too, about the business of the copse,asking my advice. Fyodor Pavlovitch means to go and see him himself. So ifyou were to be beforehand with Fyodor Pavlovitch and to make Lyagavy theoffer you’ve made me, he might possibly—”
“A brilliant idea!” Mitya interrupted ecstatically. “He’s the very man, itwould just suit him. He’s haggling with him for it, being asked too much,and here he would have all the documents entitling him to the propertyitself. Ha ha ha!”
And Mitya suddenly went off into his short, wooden laugh, startlingSamsonov.
“How can I thank you, Kuzma Kuzmitch?” cried Mitya effusively.
“Don’t mention it,” said Samsonov, inclining his head.
“But you don’t know, you’ve saved me. Oh, it was a true presentimentbrought me to you.... So now to this priest!”
“No need of thanks.”
“I’ll make haste and fly there. I’m afraid I’ve overtaxed your strength. Ishall never forget it. It’s a Russian says that, Kuzma Kuzmitch, a R‐r‐russian!”
“To be sure!”
Mitya seized his hand to press it, but there was a malignant gleam in theold man’s eye. Mitya drew back his hand, but at once blamed himself forhis mistrustfulness.
“It’s because he’s tired,” he thought.
“For her sake! For her sake, Kuzma Kuzmitch! You understand that it’s forher,” he cried, his voice ringing through the room. He bowed, turnedsharply round, and with the same long stride walked to the door withoutlooking back. He was trembling with delight.
“Everything was on the verge of ruin and my guardian angel saved me,” wasthe thought in his mind. And if such a business man as Samsonov (a mostworthy old man, and what dignity!) had suggested this course, then ...then success was assured. He would fly off immediately. “I will be backbefore night, I shall be back at night and the thing is done. Could theold man have been laughing at me?” exclaimed Mitya, as he strode towardshis lodging. He could, of course, imagine nothing, but that the advice waspractical “from such a business man” with an understanding of thebusiness, with an understanding of this Lyagavy (curious surname!). Or—theold man was laughing at him.
Alas! The second alternative was the correct one. Long afterwards, whenthe catastrophe had happened, old Samsonov himself confessed, laughing,that he had made a fool of the “captain.” He was a cold, spiteful andsarcastic man, liable to violent antipathies. Whether it was the“captain’s” excited face, or the foolish conviction of the “rake andspendthrift,” that he, Samsonov, could be taken in by such a cock‐and‐bullstory as his scheme, or his jealousy of Grushenka, in whose name this“scapegrace” had rushed in on him with such a tale to get money whichworked on the old man, I can’t tell. But at the instant when Mitya stoodbefore him, feeling his legs grow weak under him, and franticallyexclaiming that he was ruined, at that moment the old man looked at himwith intense spite, and resolved to make a laughing‐stock of him. WhenMitya had gone, Kuzma Kuzmitch, white with rage, turned to his son andbade him see to it that that beggar be never seen again, and neveradmitted even into the yard, or else he’d—
He did not utter his threat. But even his son, who often saw him enraged,trembled with fear. For a whole hour afterwards, the old man was shakingwith anger, and by evening he was worse, and sent for the doctor.


Chapter II. Lyagavy

So he must drive at full speed, and he had not the money for horses. Hehad forty kopecks, and that was all, all that was left after so many yearsof prosperity! But he had at home an old silver watch which had longceased to go. He snatched it up and carried it to a Jewish watchmaker whohad a shop in the market‐place. The Jew gave him six roubles for it.
“And I didn’t expect that,” cried Mitya, ecstatically. (He was still in astate of ecstasy.) He seized his six roubles and ran home. At home heborrowed three roubles from the people of the house, who loved him so muchthat they were pleased to give it him, though it was all they had. Mityain his excitement told them on the spot that his fate would be decidedthat day, and he described, in desperate haste, the whole scheme he hadput before Samsonov, the latter’s decision, his own hopes for the future,and so on. These people had been told many of their lodger’s secretsbefore, and so looked upon him as a gentleman who was not at all proud,and almost one of themselves. Having thus collected nine roubles Mityasent for posting‐horses to take him to the Volovya station. This was howthe fact came to be remembered and established that “at midday, on the daybefore the event, Mitya had not a farthing, and that he had sold his watchto get money and had borrowed three roubles from his landlord, all in thepresence of witnesses.”
I note this fact, later on it will be apparent why I do so.
Though he was radiant with the joyful anticipation that he would at lastsolve all his difficulties, yet, as he drew near Volovya station, hetrembled at the thought of what Grushenka might be doing in his absence.What if she made up her mind to‐day to go to Fyodor Pavlovitch? This waswhy he had gone off without telling her and why he left orders with hislandlady not to let out where he had gone, if any one came to inquire forhim.
“I must, I must get back to‐night,” he repeated, as he was jolted along inthe cart, “and I dare say I shall have to bring this Lyagavy back here ...to draw up the deed.” So mused Mitya, with a throbbing heart, but alas!his dreams were not fated to be carried out.
To begin with, he was late, taking a short cut from Volovya station whichturned out to be eighteen versts instead of twelve. Secondly, he did notfind the priest at home at Ilyinskoe; he had gone off to a neighboringvillage. While Mitya, setting off there with the same exhausted horses,was looking for him, it was almost dark.
The priest, a shy and amiable looking little man, informed him at oncethat though Lyagavy had been staying with him at first, he was now atSuhoy Possyolok, that he was staying the night in the forester’s cottage,as he was buying timber there too. At Mitya’s urgent request that he wouldtake him to Lyagavy at once, and by so doing “save him, so to speak,” thepriest agreed, after some demur, to conduct him to Suhoy Possyolok; hiscuriosity was obviously aroused. But, unluckily, he advised their going onfoot, as it would not be “much over” a verst. Mitya, of course, agreed,and marched off with his yard‐long strides, so that the poor priest almostran after him. He was a very cautious man, though not old.
Mitya at once began talking to him, too, of his plans, nervously andexcitedly asking advice in regard to Lyagavy, and talking all the way. Thepriest listened attentively, but gave little advice. He turned off Mitya’squestions with: “I don’t know. Ah, I can’t say. How can I tell?” and soon. When Mitya began to speak of his quarrel with his father over hisinheritance, the priest was positively alarmed, as he was in some waydependent on Fyodor Pavlovitch. He inquired, however, with surprise, whyhe called the peasant‐trader Gorstkin, Lyagavy, and obligingly explainedto Mitya that, though the man’s name really was Lyagavy, he was nevercalled so, as he would be grievously offended at the name, and that hemust be sure to call him Gorstkin, “or you’ll do nothing with him; hewon’t even listen to you,” said the priest in conclusion.
Mitya was somewhat surprised for a moment, and explained that that waswhat Samsonov had called him. On hearing this fact, the priest dropped thesubject, though he would have done well to put into words his doubtwhether, if Samsonov had sent him to that peasant, calling him Lyagavy,there was not something wrong about it and he was turning him intoridicule. But Mitya had no time to pause over such trifles. He hurried,striding along, and only when he reached Suhoy Possyolok did he realizethat they had come not one verst, nor one and a half, but at least three.This annoyed him, but he controlled himself.
They went into the hut. The forester lived in one half of the hut, andGorstkin was lodging in the other, the better room the other side of thepassage. They went into that room and lighted a tallow candle. The hut wasextremely overheated. On the table there was a samovar that had gone out,a tray with cups, an empty rum bottle, a bottle of vodka partly full, andsome half‐eaten crusts of wheaten bread. The visitor himself lay stretchedat full length on the bench, with his coat crushed up under his head for apillow, snoring heavily. Mitya stood in perplexity.
“Of course I must wake him. My business is too important. I’ve come insuch haste. I’m in a hurry to get back to‐day,” he said in greatagitation. But the priest and the forester stood in silence, not givingtheir opinion. Mitya went up and began trying to wake him himself; hetried vigorously, but the sleeper did not wake.
“He’s drunk,” Mitya decided. “Good Lord! What am I to do? What am I todo?” And, terribly impatient, he began pulling him by the arms, by thelegs, shaking his head, lifting him up and making him sit on the bench.Yet, after prolonged exertions, he could only succeed in getting thedrunken man to utter absurd grunts, and violent, but inarticulate oaths.
“No, you’d better wait a little,” the priest pronounced at last, “for he’sobviously not in a fit state.”
“He’s been drinking the whole day,” the forester chimed in.
“Good heavens!” cried Mitya. “If only you knew how important it is to meand how desperate I am!”
“No, you’d better wait till morning,” the priest repeated.
“Till morning? Mercy! that’s impossible!”
And in his despair he was on the point of attacking the sleeping managain, but stopped short at once, realizing the uselessness of hisefforts. The priest said nothing, the sleepy forester looked gloomy.
“What terrible tragedies real life contrives for people,” said Mitya, incomplete despair. The perspiration was streaming down his face. The priestseized the moment to put before him, very reasonably, that, even if hesucceeded in wakening the man, he would still be drunk and incapable ofconversation. “And your business is important,” he said, “so you’dcertainly better put it off till morning.” With a gesture of despair Mityaagreed.
“Father, I will stay here with a light, and seize the favorable moment. Assoon as he wakes I’ll begin. I’ll pay you for the light,” he said to theforester, “for the night’s lodging, too; you’ll remember Dmitri Karamazov.Only, Father, I don’t know what we’re to do with you. Where will yousleep?”
“No, I’m going home. I’ll take his horse and get home,” he said,indicating the forester. “And now I’ll say good‐by. I wish you allsuccess.”
So it was settled. The priest rode off on the forester’s horse, delightedto escape, though he shook his head uneasily, wondering whether he oughtnot next day to inform his benefactor Fyodor Pavlovitch of this curiousincident, “or he may in an unlucky hour hear of it, be angry, and withdrawhis favor.”
The forester, scratching himself, went back to his room without a word,and Mitya sat on the bench to “catch the favorable moment,” as heexpressed it. Profound dejection clung about his soul like a heavy mist. Aprofound, intense dejection! He sat thinking, but could reach noconclusion. The candle burnt dimly, a cricket chirped; it becameinsufferably close in the overheated room. He suddenly pictured thegarden, the path behind the garden, the door of his father’s housemysteriously opening and Grushenka running in. He leapt up from the bench.
“It’s a tragedy!” he said, grinding his teeth. Mechanically he went up tothe sleeping man and looked in his face. He was a lean, middle‐agedpeasant, with a very long face, flaxen curls, and a long, thin, reddishbeard, wearing a blue cotton shirt and a black waistcoat, from the pocketof which peeped the chain of a silver watch. Mitya looked at his face withintense hatred, and for some unknown reason his curly hair particularlyirritated him.
What was insufferably humiliating was, that after leaving things of suchimportance and making such sacrifices, he, Mitya, utterly worn out, shouldwith business of such urgency be standing over this dolt on whom his wholefate depended, while he snored as though there were nothing the matter, asthough he’d dropped from another planet.
“Oh, the irony of fate!” cried Mitya, and, quite losing his head, he fellagain to rousing the tipsy peasant. He roused him with a sort of ferocity,pulled at him, pushed him, even beat him; but after five minutes of vainexertions, he returned to his bench in helpless despair, and sat down.
“Stupid! Stupid!” cried Mitya. “And how dishonorable it all is!” somethingmade him add. His head began to ache horribly. “Should he fling it up andgo away altogether?” he wondered. “No, wait till to‐morrow now. I’ll stayon purpose. What else did I come for? Besides, I’ve no means of going. Howam I to get away from here now? Oh, the idiocy of it!”
But his head ached more and more. He sat without moving, and unconsciouslydozed off and fell asleep as he sat. He seemed to have slept for two hoursor more. He was waked up by his head aching so unbearably that he couldhave screamed. There was a hammering in his temples, and the top of hishead ached. It was a long time before he could wake up fully andunderstand what had happened to him.
At last he realized that the room was full of charcoal fumes from thestove, and that he might die of suffocation. And the drunken peasant stilllay snoring. The candle guttered and was about to go out. Mitya cried out,and ran staggering across the passage into the forester’s room. Theforester waked up at once, but hearing that the other room was full offumes, to Mitya’s surprise and annoyance, accepted the fact with strangeunconcern, though he did go to see to it.
“But he’s dead, he’s dead! and ... what am I to do then?” cried Mityafrantically.
They threw open the doors, opened a window and the chimney. Mitya broughta pail of water from the passage. First he wetted his own head, then,finding a rag of some sort, dipped it into the water, and put it onLyagavy’s head. The forester still treated the matter contemptuously, andwhen he opened the window said grumpily:
“It’ll be all right, now.”
He went back to sleep, leaving Mitya a lighted lantern. Mitya fussed aboutthe drunken peasant for half an hour, wetting his head, and gravelyresolved not to sleep all night. But he was so worn out that when he satdown for a moment to take breath, he closed his eyes, unconsciouslystretched himself full length on the bench and slept like the dead.
It was dreadfully late when he waked. It was somewhere about nine o’clock.The sun was shining brightly in the two little windows of the hut. Thecurly‐headed peasant was sitting on the bench and had his coat on. He hadanother samovar and another bottle in front of him. Yesterday’s bottle hadalready been finished, and the new one was more than half empty. Mityajumped up and saw at once that the cursed peasant was drunk again,hopelessly and incurably. He stared at him for a moment with wide openedeyes. The peasant was silently and slyly watching him, with insultingcomposure, and even a sort of contemptuous condescension, so Mityafancied. He rushed up to him.
“Excuse me, you see ... I ... you’ve most likely heard from the foresterhere in the hut. I’m Lieutenant Dmitri Karamazov, the son of the oldKaramazov whose copse you are buying.”
“That’s a lie!” said the peasant, calmly and confidently.
“A lie? You know Fyodor Pavlovitch?”
“I don’t know any of your Fyodor Pavlovitches,” said the peasant, speakingthickly.
“You’re bargaining with him for the copse, for the copse. Do wake up, andcollect yourself. Father Pavel of Ilyinskoe brought me here. You wrote toSamsonov, and he has sent me to you,” Mitya gasped breathlessly.
“You’re l‐lying!” Lyagavy blurted out again. Mitya’s legs went cold.
“For mercy’s sake! It isn’t a joke! You’re drunk, perhaps. Yet you canspeak and understand ... or else ... I understand nothing!”
“You’re a painter!”
“For mercy’s sake! I’m Karamazov, Dmitri Karamazov. I have an offer tomake you, an advantageous offer ... very advantageous offer, concerningthe copse!”
The peasant stroked his beard importantly.
“No, you’ve contracted for the job and turned out a scamp. You’re ascoundrel!”
“I assure you you’re mistaken,” cried Mitya, wringing his hands indespair. The peasant still stroked his beard, and suddenly screwed up hiseyes cunningly.
“No, you show me this: you tell me the law that allows roguery. D’youhear? You’re a scoundrel! Do you understand that?”
Mitya stepped back gloomily, and suddenly “something seemed to hit him onthe head,” as he said afterwards. In an instant a light seemed to dawn inhis mind, “a light was kindled and I grasped it all.” He stood, stupefied,wondering how he, after all a man of intelligence, could have yielded tosuch folly, have been led into such an adventure, and have kept it up foralmost twenty‐four hours, fussing round this Lyagavy, wetting his head.
“Why, the man’s drunk, dead drunk, and he’ll go on drinking now for aweek; what’s the use of waiting here? And what if Samsonov sent me here onpurpose? What if she—? Oh, God, what have I done?”
The peasant sat watching him and grinning. Another time Mitya might havekilled the fool in a fury, but now he felt as weak as a child. He wentquietly to the bench, took up his overcoat, put it on without a word, andwent out of the hut. He did not find the forester in the next room; therewas no one there. He took fifty kopecks in small change out of his pocketand put them on the table for his night’s lodging, the candle, and thetrouble he had given. Coming out of the hut he saw nothing but forest allround. He walked at hazard, not knowing which way to turn out of the hut,to the right or to the left. Hurrying there the evening before with thepriest, he had not noticed the road. He had no revengeful feeling foranybody, even for Samsonov, in his heart. He strode along a narrow forestpath, aimless, dazed, without heeding where he was going. A child couldhave knocked him down, so weak was he in body and soul. He got out of theforest somehow, however, and a vista of fields, bare after the harvest,stretched as far as the eye could see.
“What despair! What death all round!” he repeated, striding on and on.
He was saved by meeting an old merchant who was being driven acrosscountry in a hired trap. When he overtook him, Mitya asked the way, and itturned out that the old merchant, too, was going to Volovya. After somediscussion Mitya got into the trap. Three hours later they arrived. AtVolovya, Mitya at once ordered posting‐horses to drive to the town, andsuddenly realized that he was appallingly hungry. While the horses werebeing harnessed, an omelette was prepared for him. He ate it all in aninstant, ate a huge hunk of bread, ate a sausage, and swallowed threeglasses of vodka. After eating, his spirits and his heart grew lighter. Heflew towards the town, urged on the driver, and suddenly made a new and“unalterable” plan to procure that “accursed money” before evening. “Andto think, only to think that a man’s life should be ruined for the sake ofthat paltry three thousand!” he cried, contemptuously. “I’ll settle it to‐day.” And if it had not been for the thought of Grushenka and of whatmight have happened to her, which never left him, he would perhaps havebecome quite cheerful again.... But the thought of her was stabbing him tothe heart every moment, like a sharp knife.
At last they arrived, and Mitya at once ran to Grushenka.


Chapter III. Gold‐Mines

This was the visit of Mitya of which Grushenka had spoken to Rakitin withsuch horror. She was just then expecting the “message,” and was muchrelieved that Mitya had not been to see her that day or the day before.She hoped that “please God he won’t come till I’m gone away,” and hesuddenly burst in on her. The rest we know already. To get him off herhands she suggested at once that he should walk with her to Samsonov’s,where she said she absolutely must go “to settle his accounts,” and whenMitya accompanied her at once, she said good‐by to him at the gate, makinghim promise to come at twelve o’clock to take her home again. Mitya, too,was delighted at this arrangement. If she was sitting at Samsonov’s shecould not be going to Fyodor Pavlovitch’s, “if only she’s not lying,” headded at once. But he thought she was not lying from what he saw.
He was that sort of jealous man who, in the absence of the beloved woman,at once invents all sorts of awful fancies of what may be happening toher, and how she may be betraying him, but, when shaken, heartbroken,convinced of her faithlessness, he runs back to her; at the first glanceat her face, her gay, laughing, affectionate face, he revives at once,lays aside all suspicion and with joyful shame abuses himself for hisjealousy.
After leaving Grushenka at the gate he rushed home. Oh, he had so muchstill to do that day! But a load had been lifted from his heart, anyway.
“Now I must only make haste and find out from Smerdyakov whether anythinghappened there last night, whether, by any chance, she went to FyodorPavlovitch; ough!” floated through his mind.
Before he had time to reach his lodging, jealousy had surged up again inhis restless heart.
Jealousy! “Othello was not jealous, he was trustful,” observed Pushkin.And that remark alone is enough to show the deep insight of our greatpoet. Othello’s soul was shattered and his whole outlook clouded simplybecause _his ideal was destroyed_. But Othello did not begin hiding,spying, peeping. He was trustful, on the contrary. He had to be led up,pushed on, excited with great difficulty before he could entertain theidea of deceit. The truly jealous man is not like that. It is impossibleto picture to oneself the shame and moral degradation to which the jealousman can descend without a qualm of conscience. And yet it’s not as thoughthe jealous were all vulgar and base souls. On the contrary, a man oflofty feelings, whose love is pure and full of self‐sacrifice, may yethide under tables, bribe the vilest people, and be familiar with thelowest ignominy of spying and eavesdropping.
Othello was incapable of making up his mind to faithlessness—not incapableof forgiving it, but of making up his mind to it—though his soul was asinnocent and free from malice as a babe’s. It is not so with the reallyjealous man. It is hard to imagine what some jealous men can make up theirmind to and overlook, and what they can forgive! The jealous are thereadiest of all to forgive, and all women know it. The jealous man canforgive extraordinarily quickly (though, of course, after a violentscene), and he is able to forgive infidelity almost conclusively proved,the very kisses and embraces he has seen, if only he can somehow beconvinced that it has all been “for the last time,” and that his rivalwill vanish from that day forward, will depart to the ends of the earth,or that he himself will carry her away somewhere, where that dreaded rivalwill not get near her. Of course the reconciliation is only for an hour.For, even if the rival did disappear next day, he would invent another oneand would be jealous of him. And one might wonder what there was in a lovethat had to be so watched over, what a love could be worth that neededsuch strenuous guarding. But that the jealous will never understand. Andyet among them are men of noble hearts. It is remarkable, too, that thosevery men of noble hearts, standing hidden in some cupboard, listening andspying, never feel the stings of conscience at that moment, anyway, thoughthey understand clearly enough with their “noble hearts” the shamefuldepths to which they have voluntarily sunk.
At the sight of Grushenka, Mitya’s jealousy vanished, and, for an instanthe became trustful and generous, and positively despised himself for hisevil feelings. But it only proved that, in his love for the woman, therewas an element of something far higher than he himself imagined, that itwas not only a sensual passion, not only the “curve of her body,” of whichhe had talked to Alyosha. But, as soon as Grushenka had gone, Mitya beganto suspect her of all the low cunning of faithlessness, and he felt nosting of conscience at it.
And so jealousy surged up in him again. He had, in any case, to makehaste. The first thing to be done was to get hold of at least a small,temporary loan of money. The nine roubles had almost all gone on hisexpedition. And, as we all know, one can’t take a step without money. Buthe had thought over in the cart where he could get a loan. He had a braceof fine dueling pistols in a case, which he had not pawned till thenbecause he prized them above all his possessions.
In the “Metropolis” tavern he had some time since made acquaintance with ayoung official and had learnt that this very opulent bachelor waspassionately fond of weapons. He used to buy pistols, revolvers, daggers,hang them on his wall and show them to acquaintances. He prided himself onthem, and was quite a specialist on the mechanism of the revolver. Mitya,without stopping to think, went straight to him, and offered to pawn hispistols to him for ten roubles. The official, delighted, began trying topersuade him to sell them outright. But Mitya would not consent, so theyoung man gave him ten roubles, protesting that nothing would induce himto take interest. They parted friends.
Mitya was in haste; he rushed towards Fyodor Pavlovitch’s by the back way,to his arbor, to get hold of Smerdyakov as soon as possible. In this waythe fact was established that three or four hours before a certain event,of which I shall speak later on, Mitya had not a farthing, and pawned forten roubles a possession he valued, though, three hours later, he was inpossession of thousands.... But I am anticipating. From Marya Kondratyevna(the woman living near Fyodor Pavlovitch’s) he learned the very disturbingfact of Smerdyakov’s illness. He heard the story of his fall in thecellar, his fit, the doctor’s visit, Fyodor Pavlovitch’s anxiety; he heardwith interest, too, that his brother Ivan had set off that morning forMoscow.
“Then he must have driven through Volovya before me,” thought Dmitri, buthe was terribly distressed about Smerdyakov. “What will happen now? Who’llkeep watch for me? Who’ll bring me word?” he thought. He began greedilyquestioning the women whether they had seen anything the evening before.They quite understood what he was trying to find out, and completelyreassured him. No one had been there. Ivan Fyodorovitch had been there thenight; everything had been perfectly as usual. Mitya grew thoughtful. Hewould certainly have to keep watch to‐day, but where? Here or atSamsonov’s gate? He decided that he must be on the look out both here andthere, and meanwhile ... meanwhile.... The difficulty was that he had tocarry out the new plan that he had made on the journey back. He was sureof its success, but he must not delay acting upon it. Mitya resolved tosacrifice an hour to it: “In an hour I shall know everything, I shallsettle everything, and then, then, first of all to Samsonov’s. I’llinquire whether Grushenka’s there and instantly be back here again, staytill eleven, and then to Samsonov’s again to bring her home.” This waswhat he decided.
He flew home, washed, combed his hair, brushed his clothes, dressed, andwent to Madame Hohlakov’s. Alas! he had built his hopes on her. He hadresolved to borrow three thousand from that lady. And what was more, hefelt suddenly convinced that she would not refuse to lend it to him. Itmay be wondered why, if he felt so certain, he had not gone to her atfirst, one of his own sort, so to speak, instead of to Samsonov, a man hedid not know, who was not of his own class, and to whom he hardly knew howto speak.
But the fact was that he had never known Madame Hohlakov well, and hadseen nothing of her for the last month, and that he knew she could notendure him. She had detested him from the first because he was engaged toKaterina Ivanovna, while she had, for some reason, suddenly conceived thedesire that Katerina Ivanovna should throw him over, and marry the“charming, chivalrously refined Ivan, who had such excellent manners.”Mitya’s manners she detested. Mitya positively laughed at her, and hadonce said about her that she was just as lively and at her ease as she wasuncultivated. But that morning in the cart a brilliant idea had struckhim: “If she is so anxious I should not marry Katerina Ivanovna” (and heknew she was positively hysterical upon the subject) “why should sherefuse me now that three thousand, just to enable me to leave Katya andget away from her for ever. These spoilt fine ladies, if they set theirhearts on anything, will spare no expense to satisfy their caprice.Besides, she’s so rich,” Mitya argued.
As for his “plan” it was just the same as before; it consisted of theoffer of his rights to Tchermashnya—but not with a commercial object, asit had been with Samsonov, not trying to allure the lady with thepossibility of making a profit of six or seven thousand—but simply as asecurity for the debt. As he worked out this new idea, Mitya was enchantedwith it, but so it always was with him in all his undertakings, in all hissudden decisions. He gave himself up to every new idea with passionateenthusiasm. Yet, when he mounted the steps of Madame Hohlakov’s house hefelt a shiver of fear run down his spine. At that moment he saw fully, asa mathematical certainty, that this was his last hope, that if this brokedown, nothing else was left him in the world, but to “rob and murder someone for the three thousand.” It was half‐past seven when he rang at thebell.
At first fortune seemed to smile upon him. As soon as he was announced hewas received with extraordinary rapidity. “As though she were waiting forme,” thought Mitya, and as soon as he had been led to the drawing‐room,the lady of the house herself ran in, and declared at once that she wasexpecting him.
“I was expecting you! I was expecting you! Though I’d no reason to supposeyou would come to see me, as you will admit yourself. Yet, I did expectyou. You may marvel at my instinct, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, but I wasconvinced all the morning that you would come.”
“That is certainly wonderful, madam,” observed Mitya, sitting down limply,“but I have come to you on a matter of great importance.... On a matter ofsupreme importance for me, that is, madam ... for me alone ... and Ihasten—”
“I know you’ve come on most important business, Dmitri Fyodorovitch; it’snot a case of presentiment, no reactionary harking back to the miraculous(have you heard about Father Zossima?). This is a case of mathematics: youcouldn’t help coming, after all that has passed with Katerina Ivanovna;you couldn’t, you couldn’t, that’s a mathematical certainty.”
“The realism of actual life, madam, that’s what it is. But allow me toexplain—”
“Realism indeed, Dmitri Fyodorovitch. I’m all for realism now. I’ve seentoo much of miracles. You’ve heard that Father Zossima is dead?”
“No, madam, it’s the first time I’ve heard of it.” Mitya was a littlesurprised. The image of Alyosha rose to his mind.
“Last night, and only imagine—”
“Madam,” said Mitya, “I can imagine nothing except that I’m in a desperateposition, and that if you don’t help me, everything will come to grief,and I first of all. Excuse me for the triviality of the expression, butI’m in a fever—”
“I know, I know that you’re in a fever. You could hardly fail to be, andwhatever you may say to me, I know beforehand. I have long been thinkingover your destiny, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, I am watching over it and studyingit.... Oh, believe me, I’m an experienced doctor of the soul, DmitriFyodorovitch.”
“Madam, if you are an experienced doctor, I’m certainly an experiencedpatient,” said Mitya, with an effort to be polite, “and I feel that if youare watching over my destiny in this way, you will come to my help in myruin, and so allow me, at least to explain to you the plan with which Ihave ventured to come to you ... and what I am hoping of you.... I havecome, madam—”
“Don’t explain it. It’s of secondary importance. But as for help, you’renot the first I have helped, Dmitri Fyodorovitch. You have most likelyheard of my cousin, Madame Belmesov. Her husband was ruined, ‘had come togrief,’ as you characteristically express it, Dmitri Fyodorovitch. Irecommended him to take to horse‐breeding, and now he’s doing well. Haveyou any idea of horse‐breeding, Dmitri Fyodorovitch?”
“Not the faintest, madam; ah, madam, not the faintest!” cried Mitya, innervous impatience, positively starting from his seat. “I simply imploreyou, madam, to listen to me. Only give me two minutes of free speech thatI may just explain to you everything, the whole plan with which I havecome. Besides, I am short of time. I’m in a fearful hurry,” Mitya criedhysterically, feeling that she was just going to begin talking again, andhoping to cut her short. “I have come in despair ... in the last gasp ofdespair, to beg you to lend me the sum of three thousand, a loan, but onsafe, most safe security, madam, with the most trustworthy guarantees!Only let me explain—”
“You must tell me all that afterwards, afterwards!” Madame Hohlakov with agesture demanded silence in her turn, “and whatever you may tell me, Iknow it all beforehand; I’ve told you so already. You ask for a certainsum, for three thousand, but I can give you more, immeasurably more, Iwill save you, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, but you must listen to me.”
Mitya started from his seat again.
“Madam, will you really be so good!” he cried, with strong feeling. “GoodGod, you’ve saved me! You have saved a man from a violent death, from abullet.... My eternal gratitude—”
“I will give you more, infinitely more than three thousand!” cried MadameHohlakov, looking with a radiant smile at Mitya’s ecstasy.
“Infinitely? But I don’t need so much. I only need that fatal threethousand, and on my part I can give security for that sum with infinitegratitude, and I propose a plan which—”
“Enough, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, it’s said and done.” Madame Hohlakov cut himshort, with the modest triumph of beneficence: “I have promised to saveyou, and I will save you. I will save you as I did Belmesov. What do youthink of the gold‐mines, Dmitri Fyodorovitch?”
“Of the gold‐mines, madam? I have never thought anything about them.”
“But I have thought of them for you. Thought of them over and over again.I have been watching you for the last month. I’ve watched you a hundredtimes as you’ve walked past, saying to myself: That’s a man of energy whoought to be at the gold‐mines. I’ve studied your gait and come to theconclusion: that’s a man who would find gold.”
“From my gait, madam?” said Mitya, smiling.
“Yes, from your gait. You surely don’t deny that character can be toldfrom the gait, Dmitri Fyodorovitch? Science supports the idea. I’m all forscience and realism now. After all this business with Father Zossima,which has so upset me, from this very day I’m a realist and I want todevote myself to practical usefulness. I’m cured. ‘Enough!’ as Turgenevsays.”
“But, madam, the three thousand you so generously promised to lend me—”
“It is yours, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,” Madame Hohlakov cut in at once. “Themoney is as good as in your pocket, not three thousand, but three million,Dmitri Fyodorovitch, in less than no time. I’ll make you a present of theidea: you shall find gold‐mines, make millions, return and become aleading man, and wake us up and lead us to better things. Are we to leaveit all to the Jews? You will found institutions and enterprises of allsorts. You will help the poor, and they will bless you. This is the age ofrailways, Dmitri Fyodorovitch. You’ll become famous and indispensable tothe Department of Finance, which is so badly off at present. Thedepreciation of the rouble keeps me awake at night, Dmitri Fyodorovitch;people don’t know that side of me—”
“Madam, madam!” Dmitri interrupted with an uneasy presentiment. “I shallindeed, perhaps, follow your advice, your wise advice, madam.... I shallperhaps set off ... to the gold‐mines.... I’ll come and see you againabout it ... many times, indeed ... but now, that three thousand you sogenerously ... oh, that would set me free, and if you could to‐day ... yousee, I haven’t a minute, a minute to lose to‐day—”
“Enough, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, enough!” Madame Hohlakov interruptedemphatically. “The question is, will you go to the gold‐mines or not; haveyou quite made up your mind? Answer yes or no.”
“I will go, madam, afterwards.... I’ll go where you like ... but now—”
“Wait!” cried Madame Hohlakov. And jumping up and running to a handsomebureau with numerous little drawers, she began pulling out one drawerafter another, looking for something with desperate haste.
“The three thousand,” thought Mitya, his heart almost stopping, “and atthe instant ... without any papers or formalities ... that’s doing thingsin gentlemanly style! She’s a splendid woman, if only she didn’t talk somuch!”
“Here!” cried Madame Hohlakov, running back joyfully to Mitya, “here iswhat I was looking for!”
It was a tiny silver ikon on a cord, such as is sometimes worn next theskin with a cross.
“This is from Kiev, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,” she went on reverently, “fromthe relics of the Holy Martyr, Varvara. Let me put it on your neck myself,and with it dedicate you to a new life, to a new career.”
And she actually put the cord round his neck, and began arranging it. Inextreme embarrassment, Mitya bent down and helped her, and at last he gotit under his neck‐tie and collar through his shirt to his chest.
“Now you can set off,” Madame Hohlakov pronounced, sitting downtriumphantly in her place again.
“Madam, I am so touched. I don’t know how to thank you, indeed ... forsuch kindness, but ... If only you knew how precious time is to me....That sum of money, for which I shall be indebted to your generosity....Oh, madam, since you are so kind, so touchingly generous to me,” Mityaexclaimed impulsively, “then let me reveal to you ... though, of course,you’ve known it a long time ... that I love somebody here.... I have beenfalse to Katya ... Katerina Ivanovna I should say.... Oh, I’ve behavedinhumanly, dishonorably to her, but I fell in love here with another woman... a woman whom you, madam, perhaps, despise, for you know everythingalready, but whom I cannot leave on any account, and therefore that threethousand now—”
“Leave everything, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,” Madame Hohlakov interrupted inthe most decisive tone. “Leave everything, especially women. Gold‐minesare your goal, and there’s no place for women there. Afterwards, when youcome back rich and famous, you will find the girl of your heart in thehighest society. That will be a modern girl, a girl of education andadvanced ideas. By that time the dawning woman question will have gainedground, and the new woman will have appeared.”
“Madam, that’s not the point, not at all....” Mitya clasped his hands inentreaty.
“Yes, it is, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, just what you need; the very thingyou’re yearning for, though you don’t realize it yourself. I am not at allopposed to the present woman movement, Dmitri Fyodorovitch. Thedevelopment of woman, and even the political emancipation of woman in thenear future—that’s my ideal. I’ve a daughter myself, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,people don’t know that side of me. I wrote a letter to the author,Shtchedrin, on that subject. He has taught me so much, so much about thevocation of woman. So last year I sent him an anonymous letter of twolines: ‘I kiss and embrace you, my teacher, for the modern woman.Persevere.’ And I signed myself, ‘A Mother.’ I thought of signing myself‘A contemporary Mother,’ and hesitated, but I stuck to the simple‘Mother’; there’s more moral beauty in that, Dmitri Fyodorovitch. And theword ‘contemporary’ might have reminded him of ‘_The Contemporary_’—apainful recollection owing to the censorship.... Good Heavens, what is thematter!”
“Madam!” cried Mitya, jumping up at last, clasping his hands before her inhelpless entreaty. “You will make me weep if you delay what you have sogenerously—”
“Oh, do weep, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, do weep! That’s a noble feeling ...such a path lies open before you! Tears will ease your heart, and later onyou will return rejoicing. You will hasten to me from Siberia on purposeto share your joy with me—”
“But allow me, too!” Mitya cried suddenly. “For the last time I entreatyou, tell me, can I have the sum you promised me to‐day, if not, when mayI come for it?”
“What sum, Dmitri Fyodorovitch?”
“The three thousand you promised me ... that you so generously—”
“Three thousand? Roubles? Oh, no, I haven’t got three thousand,” MadameHohlakov announced with serene amazement. Mitya was stupefied.
“Why, you said just now ... you said ... you said it was as good as in myhands—”
“Oh, no, you misunderstood me, Dmitri Fyodorovitch. In that case youmisunderstood me. I was talking of the gold‐mines. It’s true I promisedyou more, infinitely more than three thousand, I remember it all now, butI was referring to the gold‐mines.”
“But the money? The three thousand?” Mitya exclaimed, awkwardly.
“Oh, if you meant money, I haven’t any. I haven’t a penny, DmitriFyodorovitch. I’m quarreling with my steward about it, and I’ve justborrowed five hundred roubles from Miüsov, myself. No, no, I’ve no money.And, do you know, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, if I had, I wouldn’t give it toyou. In the first place I never lend money. Lending money means losingfriends. And I wouldn’t give it to you particularly. I wouldn’t give ityou, because I like you and want to save you, for all you need is thegold‐mines, the gold‐mines, the gold‐mines!”
“Oh, the devil!” roared Mitya, and with all his might brought his fistdown on the table.
“Aie! Aie!” cried Madame Hohlakov, alarmed, and she flew to the other endof the drawing‐room.
Mitya spat on the ground, and strode rapidly out of the room, out of thehouse, into the street, into the darkness! He walked like one possessed,and beating himself on the breast, on the spot where he had struck himselftwo days previously, before Alyosha, the last time he saw him in the dark,on the road. What those blows upon his breast signified, _on that spot_,and what he meant by it—that was, for the time, a secret which was knownto no one in the world, and had not been told even to Alyosha. But thatsecret meant for him more than disgrace; it meant ruin, suicide. So he haddetermined, if he did not get hold of the three thousand that would payhis debt to Katerina Ivanovna, and so remove from his breast, from _thatspot on his breast_, the shame he carried upon it, that weighed on hisconscience. All this will be fully explained to the reader later on, butnow that his last hope had vanished, this man, so strong in appearance,burst out crying like a little child a few steps from the Hohlakovs’house. He walked on, and not knowing what he was doing, wiped away histears with his fist. In this way he reached the square, and suddenlybecame aware that he had stumbled against something. He heard a piercingwail from an old woman whom he had almost knocked down.
“Good Lord, you’ve nearly killed me! Why don’t you look where you’regoing, scapegrace?”
“Why, it’s you!” cried Mitya, recognizing the old woman in the dark. Itwas the old servant who waited on Samsonov, whom Mitya had particularlynoticed the day before.
“And who are you, my good sir?” said the old woman, in quite a differentvoice. “I don’t know you in the dark.”
“You live at Kuzma Kuzmitch’s. You’re the servant there?”
“Just so, sir, I was only running out to Prohoritch’s.... But I don’t knowyou now.”
“Tell me, my good woman, is Agrafena Alexandrovna there now?” said Mitya,beside himself with suspense. “I saw her to the house some time ago.”
“She has been there, sir. She stayed a little while, and went off again.”
“What? Went away?” cried Mitya. “When did she go?”
“Why, as soon as she came. She only stayed a minute. She only told KuzmaKuzmitch a tale that made him laugh, and then she ran away.”
“You’re lying, damn you!” roared Mitya.
“Aie! Aie!” shrieked the old woman, but Mitya had vanished.
He ran with all his might to the house where Grushenka lived. At themoment he reached it, Grushenka was on her way to Mokroe. It was not morethan a quarter of an hour after her departure.
Fenya was sitting with her grandmother, the old cook, Matryona, in thekitchen when “the captain” ran in. Fenya uttered a piercing shriek onseeing him.
“You scream?” roared Mitya, “where is she?”
But without giving the terror‐stricken Fenya time to utter a word, he fellall of a heap at her feet.
“Fenya, for Christ’s sake, tell me, where is she?”
“I don’t know. Dmitri Fyodorovitch, my dear, I don’t know. You may kill mebut I can’t tell you.” Fenya swore and protested. “You went out with heryourself not long ago—”
“She came back!”
“Indeed she didn’t. By God I swear she didn’t come back.”
“You’re lying!” shouted Mitya. “From your terror I know where she is.”
He rushed away. Fenya in her fright was glad she had got off so easily.But she knew very well that it was only that he was in such haste, or shemight not have fared so well. But as he ran, he surprised both Fenya andold Matryona by an unexpected action. On the table stood a brass mortar,with a pestle in it, a small brass pestle, not much more than six incheslong. Mitya already had opened the door with one hand when, with theother, he snatched up the pestle, and thrust it in his side‐pocket.
“Oh, Lord! He’s going to murder some one!” cried Fenya, flinging up herhands.


Chapter IV. In The Dark

Where was he running? “Where could she be except at Fyodor Pavlovitch’s?She must have run straight to him from Samsonov’s, that was clear now. Thewhole intrigue, the whole deceit was evident.” ... It all rushed whirlingthrough his mind. He did not run to Marya Kondratyevna’s. “There was noneed to go there ... not the slightest need ... he must raise no alarm ...they would run and tell directly.... Marya Kondratyevna was clearly in theplot, Smerdyakov too, he too, all had been bought over!”
He formed another plan of action: he ran a long way round FyodorPavlovitch’s house, crossing the lane, running down Dmitrovsky Street,then over the little bridge, and so came straight to the deserted alley atthe back, which was empty and uninhabited, with, on one side the hurdlefence of a neighbor’s kitchen‐garden, on the other the strong high fence,that ran all round Fyodor Pavlovitch’s garden. Here he chose a spot,apparently the very place, where according to the tradition, he knewLizaveta had once climbed over it: “If she could climb over it,” thethought, God knows why, occurred to him, “surely I can.” He did in factjump up, and instantly contrived to catch hold of the top of the fence.Then he vigorously pulled himself up and sat astride on it. Close by, inthe garden stood the bath‐house, but from the fence he could see thelighted windows of the house too.
“Yes, the old man’s bedroom is lighted up. She’s there!” and he leapt fromthe fence into the garden. Though he knew Grigory was ill and very likelySmerdyakov, too, and that there was no one to hear him, he instinctivelyhid himself, stood still, and began to listen. But there was dead silenceon all sides and, as though of design, complete stillness, not theslightest breath of wind.
“And naught but the whispering silence,” the line for some reason rose tohis mind. “If only no one heard me jump over the fence! I think not.”Standing still for a minute, he walked softly over the grass in thegarden, avoiding the trees and shrubs. He walked slowly, creepingstealthily at every step, listening to his own footsteps. It took him fiveminutes to reach the lighted window. He remembered that just under thewindow there were several thick and high bushes of elder and whitebeam.The door from the house into the garden on the left‐hand side, was shut;he had carefully looked on purpose to see, in passing. At last he reachedthe bushes and hid behind them. He held his breath. “I must wait now,” hethought, “to reassure them, in case they heard my footsteps and arelistening ... if only I don’t cough or sneeze.”
He waited two minutes. His heart was beating violently, and, at moments,he could scarcely breathe. “No, this throbbing at my heart won’t stop,” hethought. “I can’t wait any longer.” He was standing behind a bush in theshadow. The light of the window fell on the front part of the bush.
“How red the whitebeam berries are!” he murmured, not knowing why. Softlyand noiselessly, step by step, he approached the window, and raisedhimself on tiptoe. All Fyodor Pavlovitch’s bedroom lay open before him. Itwas not a large room, and was divided in two parts by a red screen,“Chinese,” as Fyodor Pavlovitch used to call it. The word “Chinese”flashed into Mitya’s mind, “and behind the screen, is Grushenka,” thoughtMitya. He began watching Fyodor Pavlovitch, who was wearing his newstriped‐silk dressing‐gown, which Mitya had never seen, and a silk cordwith tassels round the waist. A clean, dandified shirt of fine linen withgold studs peeped out under the collar of the dressing‐gown. On his headFyodor Pavlovitch had the same red bandage which Alyosha had seen.
“He has got himself up,” thought Mitya.
His father was standing near the window, apparently lost in thought.Suddenly he jerked up his head, listened a moment, and hearing nothingwent up to the table, poured out half a glass of brandy from a decanterand drank it off. Then he uttered a deep sigh, again stood still a moment,walked carelessly up to the looking‐glass on the wall, with his right handraised the red bandage on his forehead a little, and began examining hisbruises and scars, which had not yet disappeared.
“He’s alone,” thought Mitya, “in all probability he’s alone.”
Fyodor Pavlovitch moved away from the looking‐glass, turned suddenly tothe window and looked out. Mitya instantly slipped away into the shadow.
“She may be there behind the screen. Perhaps she’s asleep by now,” hethought, with a pang at his heart. Fyodor Pavlovitch moved away from thewindow. “He’s looking for her out of the window, so she’s not there. Whyshould he stare out into the dark? He’s wild with impatience.” ... Mityaslipped back at once, and fell to gazing in at the window again. The oldman was sitting down at the table, apparently disappointed. At last he puthis elbow on the table, and laid his right cheek against his hand. Mityawatched him eagerly.
“He’s alone, he’s alone!” he repeated again. “If she were here, his facewould be different.”
Strange to say, a queer, irrational vexation rose up in his heart that shewas not here. “It’s not that she’s not here,” he explained to himself,immediately, “but that I can’t tell for certain whether she is or not.”Mitya remembered afterwards that his mind was at that moment exceptionallyclear, that he took in everything to the slightest detail, and missed nopoint. But a feeling of misery, the misery of uncertainty and indecision,was growing in his heart with every instant. “Is she here or not?” Theangry doubt filled his heart, and suddenly, making up his mind, he put outhis hand and softly knocked on the window frame. He knocked the signal theold man had agreed upon with Smerdyakov, twice slowly and then three timesmore quickly, the signal that meant “Grushenka is here!”
The old man started, jerked up his head, and, jumping up quickly, ran tothe window. Mitya slipped away into the shadow. Fyodor Pavlovitch openedthe window and thrust his whole head out.
“Grushenka, is it you? Is it you?” he said, in a sort of trembling half‐whisper. “Where are you, my angel, where are you?” He was fearfullyagitated and breathless.
“He’s alone.” Mitya decided.
“Where are you?” cried the old man again; and he thrust his head outfarther, thrust it out to the shoulders, gazing in all directions, rightand left. “Come here, I’ve a little present for you. Come, I’ll showyou....”
“He means the three thousand,” thought Mitya.
“But where are you? Are you at the door? I’ll open it directly.”
And the old man almost climbed out of the window, peering out to theright, where there was a door into the garden, trying to see into thedarkness. In another second he would certainly have run out to open thedoor without waiting for Grushenka’s answer.
Mitya looked at him from the side without stirring. The old man’s profilethat he loathed so, his pendent Adam’s apple, his hooked nose, his lipsthat smiled in greedy expectation, were all brightly lighted up by theslanting lamplight falling on the left from the room. A horrible fury ofhatred suddenly surged up in Mitya’s heart: “There he was, his rival, theman who had tormented him, had ruined his life!” It was a rush of thatsudden, furious, revengeful anger of which he had spoken, as thoughforeseeing it, to Alyosha, four days ago in the arbor, when, in answer toAlyosha’s question, “How can you say you’ll kill our father?” “I don’tknow, I don’t know,” he had said then. “Perhaps I shall not kill him,perhaps I shall. I’m afraid he’ll suddenly be so loathsome to me at thatmoment. I hate his double chin, his nose, his eyes, his shameless grin. Ifeel a personal repulsion. That’s what I’m afraid of, that’s what may betoo much for me.” ... This personal repulsion was growing unendurable.Mitya was beside himself, he suddenly pulled the brass pestle out of hispocket.
                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐
“God was watching over me then,” Mitya himself said afterwards. At thatvery moment Grigory waked up on his bed of sickness. Earlier in theevening he had undergone the treatment which Smerdyakov had described toIvan. He had rubbed himself all over with vodka mixed with a secret, verystrong decoction, had drunk what was left of the mixture while his wiferepeated a “certain prayer” over him, after which he had gone to bed.Marfa Ignatyevna had tasted the stuff, too, and, being unused to strongdrink, slept like the dead beside her husband.
But Grigory waked up in the night, quite suddenly, and, after a moment’sreflection, though he immediately felt a sharp pain in his back, he sat upin bed. Then he deliberated again, got up and dressed hurriedly. Perhapshis conscience was uneasy at the thought of sleeping while the house wasunguarded “in such perilous times.” Smerdyakov, exhausted by his fit, laymotionless in the next room. Marfa Ignatyevna did not stir. “The stuff’sbeen too much for the woman,” Grigory thought, glancing at her, andgroaning, he went out on the steps. No doubt he only intended to look outfrom the steps, for he was hardly able to walk, the pain in his back andhis right leg was intolerable. But he suddenly remembered that he had notlocked the little gate into the garden that evening. He was the mostpunctual and precise of men, a man who adhered to an unchangeable routine,and habits that lasted for years. Limping and writhing with pain he wentdown the steps and towards the garden. Yes, the gate stood wide open.Mechanically he stepped into the garden. Perhaps he fancied something,perhaps caught some sound, and, glancing to the left he saw his master’swindow open. No one was looking out of it then.
“What’s it open for? It’s not summer now,” thought Grigory, and suddenly,at that very instant he caught a glimpse of something extraordinary beforehim in the garden. Forty paces in front of him a man seemed to be runningin the dark, a sort of shadow was moving very fast.
“Good Lord!” cried Grigory beside himself, and forgetting the pain in hisback, he hurried to intercept the running figure. He took a short cut,evidently he knew the garden better; the flying figure went towards thebath‐house, ran behind it and rushed to the garden fence. Grigoryfollowed, not losing sight of him, and ran, forgetting everything. Hereached the fence at the very moment the man was climbing over it. Grigorycried out, beside himself, pounced on him, and clutched his leg in his twohands.
Yes, his foreboding had not deceived him. He recognized him, it was he,the “monster,” the “parricide.”
“Parricide!” the old man shouted so that the whole neighborhood couldhear, but he had not time to shout more, he fell at once, as though struckby lightning.
Mitya jumped back into the garden and bent over the fallen man. In Mitya’shands was a brass pestle, and he flung it mechanically in the grass. Thepestle fell two paces from Grigory, not in the grass but on the path, in amost conspicuous place. For some seconds he examined the prostrate figurebefore him. The old man’s head was covered with blood. Mitya put out hishand and began feeling it. He remembered afterwards clearly, that he hadbeen awfully anxious to make sure whether he had broken the old man’sskull, or simply stunned him with the pestle. But the blood was flowinghorribly; and in a moment Mitya’s fingers were drenched with the hotstream. He remembered taking out of his pocket the clean whitehandkerchief with which he had provided himself for his visit to MadameHohlakov, and putting it to the old man’s head, senselessly trying to wipethe blood from his face and temples. But the handkerchief was instantlysoaked with blood.
“Good heavens! what am I doing it for?” thought Mitya, suddenly pullinghimself together. “If I have broken his skull, how can I find out now? Andwhat difference does it make now?” he added, hopelessly. “If I’ve killedhim, I’ve killed him.... You’ve come to grief, old man, so there you mustlie!” he said aloud. And suddenly turning to the fence, he vaulted over itinto the lane and fell to running—the handkerchief soaked with blood heheld, crushed up in his right fist, and as he ran he thrust it into theback pocket of his coat. He ran headlong, and the few passers‐by who methim in the dark, in the streets, remembered afterwards that they had met aman running that night. He flew back again to the widow Morozov’s house.
Immediately after he had left it that evening, Fenya had rushed to thechief porter, Nazar Ivanovitch, and besought him, for Christ’s sake, “notto let the captain in again to‐day or to‐morrow.” Nazar Ivanovitchpromised, but went upstairs to his mistress who had suddenly sent for him,and meeting his nephew, a boy of twenty, who had recently come from thecountry, on the way up told him to take his place, but forgot to mention“the captain.” Mitya, running up to the gate, knocked. The lad instantlyrecognized him, for Mitya had more than once tipped him. Opening the gateat once, he let him in, and hastened to inform him with a good‐humoredsmile that “Agrafena Alexandrovna is not at home now, you know.”
“Where is she then, Prohor?” asked Mitya, stopping short.
“She set off this evening, some two hours ago, with Timofey, to Mokroe.”
“What for?” cried Mitya.
“That I can’t say. To see some officer. Some one invited her and horseswere sent to fetch her.”
Mitya left him, and ran like a madman to Fenya.


Chapter V. A Sudden Resolution

She was sitting in the kitchen with her grandmother; they were both justgoing to bed. Relying on Nazar Ivanovitch, they had not locked themselvesin. Mitya ran in, pounced on Fenya and seized her by the throat.
“Speak at once! Where is she? With whom is she now, at Mokroe?” he roaredfuriously.
Both the women squealed.
“Aie! I’ll tell you. Aie! Dmitri Fyodorovitch, darling, I’ll tell youeverything directly, I won’t hide anything,” gabbled Fenya, frightened todeath; “she’s gone to Mokroe, to her officer.”
“What officer?” roared Mitya.
“To her officer, the same one she used to know, the one who threw her overfive years ago,” cackled Fenya, as fast as she could speak.
Mitya withdrew the hands with which he was squeezing her throat. He stoodfacing her, pale as death, unable to utter a word, but his eyes showedthat he realized it all, all, from the first word, and guessed the wholeposition. Poor Fenya was not in a condition at that moment to observewhether he understood or not. She remained sitting on the trunk as she hadbeen when he ran into the room, trembling all over, holding her hands outbefore her as though trying to defend herself. She seemed to have grownrigid in that position. Her wide‐opened, scared eyes were fixed immovablyupon him. And to make matters worse, both his hands were smeared withblood. On the way, as he ran, he must have touched his forehead with them,wiping off the perspiration, so that on his forehead and his right cheekwere blood‐stained patches. Fenya was on the verge of hysterics. The oldcook had jumped up and was staring at him like a mad woman, almostunconscious with terror.
Mitya stood for a moment, then mechanically sank on to a chair next toFenya. He sat, not reflecting but, as it were, terror‐stricken, benumbed.Yet everything was clear as day: that officer, he knew about him, he kneweverything perfectly, he had known it from Grushenka herself, had knownthat a letter had come from him a month before. So that for a month, for awhole month, this had been going on, a secret from him, till the veryarrival of this new man, and he had never thought of him! But how couldhe, how could he not have thought of him? Why was it he had forgotten thisofficer, like that, forgotten him as soon as he heard of him? That was thequestion that faced him like some monstrous thing. And he looked at thismonstrous thing with horror, growing cold with horror.
But suddenly, as gently and mildly as a gentle and affectionate child, hebegan speaking to Fenya as though he had utterly forgotten how he hadscared and hurt her just now. He fell to questioning Fenya with an extremepreciseness, astonishing in his position, and though the girl lookedwildly at his blood‐stained hands, she, too, with wonderful readiness andrapidity, answered every question as though eager to put the whole truthand nothing but the truth before him. Little by little, even with a sortof enjoyment, she began explaining every detail, not wanting to tormenthim, but, as it were, eager to be of the utmost service to him. Shedescribed the whole of that day, in great detail, the visit of Rakitin andAlyosha, how she, Fenya, had stood on the watch, how the mistress had setoff, and how she had called out of the window to Alyosha to give him,Mitya, her greetings, and to tell him “to remember for ever how she hadloved him for an hour.”
Hearing of the message, Mitya suddenly smiled, and there was a flush ofcolor on his pale cheeks. At the same moment Fenya said to him, not a bitafraid now to be inquisitive:
“Look at your hands, Dmitri Fyodorovitch. They’re all over blood!”
“Yes,” answered Mitya mechanically. He looked carelessly at his hands andat once forgot them and Fenya’s question.
He sank into silence again. Twenty minutes had passed since he had run in.His first horror was over, but evidently some new fixed determination hadtaken possession of him. He suddenly stood up, smiling dreamily.
“What has happened to you, sir?” said Fenya, pointing to his hands again.She spoke compassionately, as though she felt very near to him now in hisgrief. Mitya looked at his hands again.
“That’s blood, Fenya,” he said, looking at her with a strange expression.“That’s human blood, and my God! why was it shed? But ... Fenya ...there’s a fence here” (he looked at her as though setting her a riddle),“a high fence, and terrible to look at. But at dawn to‐morrow, when thesun rises, Mitya will leap over that fence.... You don’t understand whatfence, Fenya, and, never mind.... You’ll hear to‐morrow and understand ...and now, good‐by. I won’t stand in her way. I’ll step aside, I know how tostep aside. Live, my joy.... You loved me for an hour, remember MityenkaKaramazov so for ever.... She always used to call me Mityenka, do youremember?”
And with those words he went suddenly out of the kitchen. Fenya was almostmore frightened at this sudden departure than she had been when he ran inand attacked her.
Just ten minutes later Dmitri went in to Pyotr Ilyitch Perhotin, the youngofficial with whom he had pawned his pistols. It was by now half‐pasteight, and Pyotr Ilyitch had finished his evening tea, and had just puthis coat on again to go to the “Metropolis” to play billiards. Mityacaught him coming out.
Seeing him with his face all smeared with blood, the young man uttered acry of surprise.
“Good heavens! What is the matter?”
“I’ve come for my pistols,” said Mitya, “and brought you the money. Andthanks very much. I’m in a hurry, Pyotr Ilyitch, please make haste.”
Pyotr Ilyitch grew more and more surprised; he suddenly caught sight of abundle of bank‐notes in Mitya’s hand, and what was more, he had walked inholding the notes as no one walks in and no one carries money: he had themin his right hand, and held them outstretched as if to show them.Perhotin’s servant‐boy, who met Mitya in the passage, said afterwards thathe walked into the passage in the same way, with the money outstretched inhis hand, so he must have been carrying them like that even in thestreets. They were all rainbow‐colored hundred‐rouble notes, and thefingers holding them were covered with blood.
When Pyotr Ilyitch was questioned later on as to the sum of money, he saidthat it was difficult to judge at a glance, but that it might have beentwo thousand, or perhaps three, but it was a big, “fat” bundle. “DmitriFyodorovitch,” so he testified afterwards, “seemed unlike himself, too;not drunk, but, as it were, exalted, lost to everything, but at the sametime, as it were, absorbed, as though pondering and searching forsomething and unable to come to a decision. He was in great haste,answered abruptly and very strangely, and at moments seemed not at alldejected but quite cheerful.”
“But what _is_ the matter with you? What’s wrong?” cried Pyotr Ilyitch,looking wildly at his guest. “How is it that you’re all covered withblood? Have you had a fall? Look at yourself!”
He took him by the elbow and led him to the glass.
Seeing his blood‐stained face, Mitya started and scowled wrathfully.
“Damnation! That’s the last straw,” he muttered angrily, hurriedlychanging the notes from his right hand to the left, and impulsively jerkedthe handkerchief out of his pocket. But the handkerchief turned out to besoaked with blood, too (it was the handkerchief he had used to wipeGrigory’s face). There was scarcely a white spot on it, and it had notmerely begun to dry, but had stiffened into a crumpled ball and could notbe pulled apart. Mitya threw it angrily on the floor.
“Oh, damn it!” he said. “Haven’t you a rag of some sort ... to wipe myface?”
“So you’re only stained, not wounded? You’d better wash,” said PyotrIlyitch. “Here’s a wash‐stand. I’ll pour you out some water.”
“A wash‐stand? That’s all right ... but where am I to put this?”
With the strangest perplexity he indicated his bundle of hundred‐roublenotes, looking inquiringly at Pyotr Ilyitch as though it were for him todecide what he, Mitya, was to do with his own money.
“In your pocket, or on the table here. They won’t be lost.”
“In my pocket? Yes, in my pocket. All right.... But, I say, that’s allnonsense,” he cried, as though suddenly coming out of his absorption.“Look here, let’s first settle that business of the pistols. Give themback to me. Here’s your money ... because I am in great need of them ...and I haven’t a minute, a minute to spare.”
And taking the topmost note from the bundle he held it out to PyotrIlyitch.
“But I shan’t have change enough. Haven’t you less?”
“No,” said Mitya, looking again at the bundle, and as though not trustinghis own words he turned over two or three of the topmost ones.
“No, they’re all alike,” he added, and again he looked inquiringly atPyotr Ilyitch.
“How have you grown so rich?” the latter asked. “Wait, I’ll send my boy toPlotnikov’s, they close late—to see if they won’t change it. Here, Misha!”he called into the passage.
“To Plotnikov’s shop—first‐rate!” cried Mitya, as though struck by anidea. “Misha,” he turned to the boy as he came in, “look here, run toPlotnikov’s and tell them that Dmitri Fyodorovitch sends his greetings,and will be there directly.... But listen, listen, tell them to havechampagne, three dozen bottles, ready before I come, and packed as it wasto take to Mokroe. I took four dozen with me then,” he added (suddenlyaddressing Pyotr Ilyitch); “they know all about it, don’t you trouble,Misha,” he turned again to the boy. “Stay, listen; tell them to put incheese, Strasburg pies, smoked fish, ham, caviare, and everything,everything they’ve got, up to a hundred roubles, or a hundred and twentyas before.... But wait: don’t let them forget dessert, sweets, pears,water‐melons, two or three or four—no, one melon’s enough, and chocolate,candy, toffee, fondants; in fact, everything I took to Mokroe before,three hundred roubles’ worth with the champagne ... let it be just thesame again. And remember, Misha, if you are called Misha—His name isMisha, isn’t it?” He turned to Pyotr Ilyitch again.
“Wait a minute,” Protr Ilyitch intervened, listening and watching himuneasily, “you’d better go yourself and tell them. He’ll muddle it.”
“He will, I see he will! Eh, Misha! Why, I was going to kiss you for thecommission.... If you don’t make a mistake, there’s ten roubles for you,run along, make haste.... Champagne’s the chief thing, let them bring upchampagne. And brandy, too, and red and white wine, and all I had then....They know what I had then.”
“But listen!” Pyotr Ilyitch interrupted with some impatience. “I say, lethim simply run and change the money and tell them not to close, and you goand tell them.... Give him your note. Be off, Misha! Put your best legforward!”
Pyotr Ilyitch seemed to hurry Misha off on purpose, because the boyremained standing with his mouth and eyes wide open, apparentlyunderstanding little of Mitya’s orders, gazing up with amazement andterror at his blood‐stained face and the trembling bloodstained fingersthat held the notes.
“Well, now come and wash,” said Pyotr Ilyitch sternly. “Put the money onthe table or else in your pocket.... That’s right, come along. But takeoff your coat.”
And beginning to help him off with his coat, he cried out again:
“Look, your coat’s covered with blood, too!”
“That ... it’s not the coat. It’s only a little here on the sleeve.... Andthat’s only here where the handkerchief lay. It must have soaked through.I must have sat on the handkerchief at Fenya’s, and the blood’s comethrough,” Mitya explained at once with a childlike unconsciousness thatwas astounding. Pyotr Ilyitch listened, frowning.
“Well, you must have been up to something; you must have been fightingwith some one,” he muttered.
They began to wash. Pyotr Ilyitch held the jug and poured out the water.Mitya, in desperate haste, scarcely soaped his hands (they were trembling,and Pyotr Ilyitch remembered it afterwards). But the young officialinsisted on his soaping them thoroughly and rubbing them more. He seemedto exercise more and more sway over Mitya, as time went on. It may benoted in passing that he was a young man of sturdy character.
“Look, you haven’t got your nails clean. Now rub your face; here, on yourtemples, by your ear.... Will you go in that shirt? Where are you going?Look, all the cuff of your right sleeve is covered with blood.”
“Yes, it’s all bloody,” observed Mitya, looking at the cuff of his shirt.
“Then change your shirt.”
“I haven’t time. You see I’ll ...” Mitya went on with the same confidingingenuousness, drying his face and hands on the towel, and putting on hiscoat. “I’ll turn it up at the wrist. It won’t be seen under the coat....You see!”
“Tell me now, what game have you been up to? Have you been fighting withsome one? In the tavern again, as before? Have you been beating thatcaptain again?” Pyotr Ilyitch asked him reproachfully. “Whom have you beenbeating now ... or killing, perhaps?”
“Nonsense!” said Mitya.
“Why ‘nonsense’?”
“Don’t worry,” said Mitya, and he suddenly laughed. “I smashed an oldwoman in the market‐place just now.”
“Smashed? An old woman?”
“An old man!” cried Mitya, looking Pyotr Ilyitch straight in the face,laughing, and shouting at him as though he were deaf.
“Confound it! An old woman, an old man.... Have you killed some one?”
“We made it up. We had a row—and made it up. In a place I know of. Weparted friends. A fool.... He’s forgiven me.... He’s sure to have forgivenme by now ... if he had got up, he wouldn’t have forgiven me”—Mityasuddenly winked—“only damn him, you know, I say, Pyotr Ilyitch, damn him!Don’t worry about him! I don’t want to just now!” Mitya snapped out,resolutely.
“Whatever do you want to go picking quarrels with every one for? ... Justas you did with that captain over some nonsense.... You’ve been fightingand now you’re rushing off on the spree—that’s you all over! Three dozenchampagne—what do you want all that for?”
“Bravo! Now give me the pistols. Upon my honor I’ve no time now. I shouldlike to have a chat with you, my dear boy, but I haven’t the time. Andthere’s no need, it’s too late for talking. Where’s my money? Where have Iput it?” he cried, thrusting his hands into his pockets.
“You put it on the table ... yourself.... Here it is. Had you forgotten?Money’s like dirt or water to you, it seems. Here are your pistols. It’san odd thing, at six o’clock you pledged them for ten roubles, and nowyou’ve got thousands. Two or three I should say.”
“Three, you bet,” laughed Mitya, stuffing the notes into the side‐pocketof his trousers.
“You’ll lose it like that. Have you found a gold‐mine?”
“The mines? The gold‐mines?” Mitya shouted at the top of his voice andwent off into a roar of laughter. “Would you like to go to the mines,Perhotin? There’s a lady here who’ll stump up three thousand for you, ifonly you’ll go. She did it for me, she’s so awfully fond of gold‐mines. Doyou know Madame Hohlakov?”
“I don’t know her, but I’ve heard of her and seen her. Did she really giveyou three thousand? Did she really?” said Pyotr Ilyitch, eyeing himdubiously.
“As soon as the sun rises to‐morrow, as soon as Phœbus, ever young, fliesupwards, praising and glorifying God, you go to her, this Madame Hohlakov,and ask her whether she did stump up that three thousand or not. Try andfind out.”
“I don’t know on what terms you are ... since you say it so positively, Isuppose she did give it to you. You’ve got the money in your hand, butinstead of going to Siberia you’re spending it all.... Where are youreally off to now, eh?”
“To Mokroe.”
“To Mokroe? But it’s night!”
“Once the lad had all, now the lad has naught,” cried Mitya suddenly.
“How ‘naught’? You say that with all those thousands!”
“I’m not talking about thousands. Damn thousands! I’m talking of thefemale character.

    Fickle is the heart of woman    Treacherous and full of vice;

I agree with Ulysses. That’s what he says.”
“I don’t understand you!”
“Am I drunk?”
“Not drunk, but worse.”
“I’m drunk in spirit, Pyotr Ilyitch, drunk in spirit! But that’s enough!”
“What are you doing, loading the pistol?”
“I’m loading the pistol.”
Unfastening the pistol‐case, Mitya actually opened the powder horn, andcarefully sprinkled and rammed in the charge. Then he took the bullet and,before inserting it, held it in two fingers in front of the candle.
“Why are you looking at the bullet?” asked Pyotr Ilyitch, watching himwith uneasy curiosity.
“Oh, a fancy. Why, if you meant to put that bullet in your brain, wouldyou look at it or not?”
“Why look at it?”
“It’s going into my brain, so it’s interesting to look and see what it’slike. But that’s foolishness, a moment’s foolishness. Now that’s done,” headded, putting in the bullet and driving it home with the ramrod. “PyotrIlyitch, my dear fellow, that’s nonsense, all nonsense, and if only youknew what nonsense! Give me a little piece of paper now.”
“Here’s some paper.”
“No, a clean new piece, writing‐paper. That’s right.”
And taking a pen from the table, Mitya rapidly wrote two lines, folded thepaper in four, and thrust it in his waistcoat pocket. He put the pistolsin the case, locked it up, and kept it in his hand. Then he looked atPyotr Ilyitch with a slow, thoughtful smile.
“Now, let’s go.”
“Where are we going? No, wait a minute.... Are you thinking of puttingthat bullet in your brain, perhaps?” Pyotr Ilyitch asked uneasily.
“I was fooling about the bullet! I want to live. I love life! You may besure of that. I love golden‐haired Phœbus and his warm light.... DearPyotr Ilyitch, do you know how to step aside?”
“What do you mean by ‘stepping aside’?”
“Making way. Making way for a dear creature, and for one I hate. And tolet the one I hate become dear—that’s what making way means! And to say tothem: God bless you, go your way, pass on, while I—”
“While you—?”
“That’s enough, let’s go.”
“Upon my word. I’ll tell some one to prevent your going there,” said PyotrIlyitch, looking at him. “What are you going to Mokroe for, now?”
“There’s a woman there, a woman. That’s enough for you. You shut up.”
“Listen, though you’re such a savage I’ve always liked you.... I feelanxious.”
“Thanks, old fellow. I’m a savage you say. Savages, savages! That’s what Iam always saying. Savages! Why, here’s Misha! I was forgetting him.”
Misha ran in, post‐haste, with a handful of notes in change, and reportedthat every one was in a bustle at the Plotnikovs’; “They’re carrying downthe bottles, and the fish, and the tea; it will all be ready directly.”Mitya seized ten roubles and handed it to Pyotr Ilyitch, then tossedanother ten‐rouble note to Misha.
“Don’t dare to do such a thing!” cried Pyotr Ilyitch. “I won’t have it inmy house, it’s a bad, demoralizing habit. Put your money away. Here, putit here, why waste it? It would come in handy to‐morrow, and I dare sayyou’ll be coming to me to borrow ten roubles again. Why do you keepputting the notes in your side‐pocket? Ah, you’ll lose them!”
“I say, my dear fellow, let’s go to Mokroe together.”
“What should I go for?”
“I say, let’s open a bottle at once, and drink to life! I want to drink,and especially to drink with you. I’ve never drunk with you, have I?”
“Very well, we can go to the ‘Metropolis.’ I was just going there.”
“I haven’t time for that. Let’s drink at the Plotnikovs’, in the backroom. Shall I ask you a riddle?”
“Ask away.”
Mitya took the piece of paper out of his waistcoat pocket, unfolded it andshowed it. In a large, distinct hand was written: “I punish myself for mywhole life, my whole life I punish!”
“I will certainly speak to some one, I’ll go at once,” said Pyotr Ilyitch,after reading the paper.
“You won’t have time, dear boy, come and have a drink. March!”
Plotnikov’s shop was at the corner of the street, next door but one toPyotr Ilyitch’s. It was the largest grocery shop in our town, and by nomeans a bad one, belonging to some rich merchants. They kept everythingthat could be got in a Petersburg shop, grocery of all sort, wines“bottled by the brothers Eliseyev,” fruits, cigars, tea, coffee, sugar,and so on. There were three shop‐assistants and two errand boys alwaysemployed. Though our part of the country had grown poorer, the landownershad gone away, and trade had got worse, yet the grocery stores flourishedas before, every year with increasing prosperity; there were plenty ofpurchasers for their goods.
They were awaiting Mitya with impatience in the shop. They had vividrecollections of how he had bought, three or four weeks ago, wine andgoods of all sorts to the value of several hundred roubles, paid for incash (they would never have let him have anything on credit, of course).They remembered that then, as now, he had had a bundle of hundred‐roublenotes in his hand, and had scattered them at random, without bargaining,without reflecting, or caring to reflect what use so much wine andprovisions would be to him. The story was told all over the town that,driving off then with Grushenka to Mokroe, he had “spent three thousand inone night and the following day, and had come back from the spree withouta penny.” He had picked up a whole troop of gypsies (encamped in ourneighborhood at the time), who for two days got money without stint out ofhim while he was drunk, and drank expensive wine without stint. Peopleused to tell, laughing at Mitya, how he had given champagne to grimy‐handed peasants, and feasted the village women and girls on sweets andStrasburg pies. Though to laugh at Mitya to his face was rather a riskyproceeding, there was much laughter behind his back, especially in thetavern, at his own ingenuous public avowal that all he had got out ofGrushenka by this “escapade” was “permission to kiss her foot, and thatwas the utmost she had allowed him.”
By the time Mitya and Pyotr Ilyitch reached the shop, they found a cartwith three horses harnessed abreast with bells, and with Andrey, thedriver, ready waiting for Mitya at the entrance. In the shop they hadalmost entirely finished packing one box of provisions, and were onlywaiting for Mitya’s arrival to nail it down and put it in the cart. PyotrIlyitch was astounded.
“Where did this cart come from in such a hurry?” he asked Mitya.
“I met Andrey as I ran to you, and told him to drive straight here to theshop. There’s no time to lose. Last time I drove with Timofey, but Timofeynow has gone on before me with the witch. Shall we be very late, Andrey?”
“They’ll only get there an hour at most before us, not even that maybe. Igot Timofey ready to start. I know how he’ll go. Their pace won’t be ours,Dmitri Fyodorovitch. How could it be? They won’t get there an hourearlier!” Andrey, a lanky, red‐haired, middle‐aged driver, wearing a full‐skirted coat, and with a kaftan on his arm, replied warmly.
“Fifty roubles for vodka if we’re only an hour behind them.”
“I warrant the time, Dmitri Fyodorovitch. Ech, they won’t be half an hourbefore us, let alone an hour.”
Though Mitya bustled about seeing after things, he gave his ordersstrangely, as it were disconnectedly, and inconsecutively. He began asentence and forgot the end of it. Pyotr Ilyitch found himself obliged tocome to the rescue.
“Four hundred roubles’ worth, not less than four hundred roubles’ worth,just as it was then,” commanded Mitya. “Four dozen champagne, not a bottleless.”
“What do you want with so much? What’s it for? Stay!” cried Pyotr Ilyitch.“What’s this box? What’s in it? Surely there isn’t four hundred roubles’worth here?”
The officious shopmen began explaining with oily politeness that the firstbox contained only half a dozen bottles of champagne, and only “the mostindispensable articles,” such as savories, sweets, toffee, etc. But themain part of the goods ordered would be packed and sent off, as on theprevious occasion, in a special cart also with three horses traveling atfull speed, so that it would arrive not more than an hour later thanDmitri Fyodorovitch himself.
“Not more than an hour! Not more than an hour! And put in more toffee andfondants. The girls there are so fond of it,” Mitya insisted hotly.
“The fondants are all right. But what do you want with four dozen ofchampagne? One would be enough,” said Pyotr Ilyitch, almost angry. Hebegan bargaining, asking for a bill of the goods, and refused to besatisfied. But he only succeeded in saving a hundred roubles. In the endit was agreed that only three hundred roubles’ worth should be sent.
“Well, you may go to the devil!” cried Pyotr Ilyitch, on second thoughts.“What’s it to do with me? Throw away your money, since it’s cost younothing.”
“This way, my economist, this way, don’t be angry.” Mitya drew him into aroom at the back of the shop. “They’ll give us a bottle here directly.We’ll taste it. Ech, Pyotr Ilyitch, come along with me, for you’re a nicefellow, the sort I like.”
Mitya sat down on a wicker chair, before a little table, covered with adirty dinner‐napkin. Pyotr Ilyitch sat down opposite, and the champagnesoon appeared, and oysters were suggested to the gentlemen. “First‐classoysters, the last lot in.”
“Hang the oysters. I don’t eat them. And we don’t need anything,” criedPyotr Ilyitch, almost angrily.
“There’s no time for oysters,” said Mitya. “And I’m not hungry. Do youknow, friend,” he said suddenly, with feeling, “I never have liked allthis disorder.”
“Who does like it? Three dozen of champagne for peasants, upon my word,that’s enough to make any one angry!”
“That’s not what I mean. I’m talking of a higher order. There’s no orderin me, no higher order. But ... that’s all over. There’s no need to grieveabout it. It’s too late, damn it! My whole life has been disorder, and onemust set it in order. Is that a pun, eh?”
“You’re raving, not making puns!”

    “Glory be to God in Heaven,    Glory be to God in me....

“That verse came from my heart once, it’s not a verse, but a tear.... Imade it myself ... not while I was pulling the captain’s beard,though....”
“Why do you bring him in all of a sudden?”
“Why do I bring him in? Foolery! All things come to an end; all things aremade equal. That’s the long and short of it.”
“You know, I keep thinking of your pistols.”
“That’s all foolery, too! Drink, and don’t be fanciful. I love life. I’veloved life too much, shamefully much. Enough! Let’s drink to life, dearboy, I propose the toast. Why am I pleased with myself? I’m a scoundrel,but I’m satisfied with myself. And yet I’m tortured by the thought thatI’m a scoundrel, but satisfied with myself. I bless the creation. I’mready to bless God and His creation directly, but ... I must kill onenoxious insect for fear it should crawl and spoil life for others.... Letus drink to life, dear brother. What can be more precious than life?Nothing! To life, and to one queen of queens!”
“Let’s drink to life and to your queen, too, if you like.”
They drank a glass each. Although Mitya was excited and expansive, yet hewas melancholy, too. It was as though some heavy, overwhelming anxietywere weighing upon him.
“Misha ... here’s your Misha come! Misha, come here, my boy, drink thisglass to Phœbus, the golden‐haired, of to‐morrow morn....”
“What are you giving it him for?” cried Pyotr Ilyitch, irritably.
“Yes, yes, yes, let me! I want to!”
“E—ech!”
Misha emptied the glass, bowed, and ran out.
“He’ll remember it afterwards,” Mitya remarked. “Woman, I love woman! Whatis woman? The queen of creation! My heart is sad, my heart is sad, PyotrIlyitch. Do you remember Hamlet? ‘I am very sorry, good Horatio! Alas,poor Yorick!’ Perhaps that’s me, Yorick? Yes, I’m Yorick now, and a skullafterwards.”
Pyotr Ilyitch listened in silence. Mitya, too, was silent for a while.
“What dog’s that you’ve got here?” he asked the shopman, casually,noticing a pretty little lap‐dog with dark eyes, sitting in the corner.
“It belongs to Varvara Alexyevna, the mistress,” answered the clerk. “Shebrought it and forgot it here. It must be taken back to her.”
“I saw one like it ... in the regiment ...” murmured Mitya dreamily, “onlythat one had its hind leg broken.... By the way, Pyotr Ilyitch, I wantedto ask you: have you ever stolen anything in your life?”
“What a question!”
“Oh, I didn’t mean anything. From somebody’s pocket, you know. I don’tmean government money, every one steals that, and no doubt you do,too....”
“You go to the devil.”
“I’m talking of other people’s money. Stealing straight out of a pocket?Out of a purse, eh?”
“I stole twenty copecks from my mother when I was nine years old. I tookit off the table on the sly, and held it tight in my hand.”
“Well, and what happened?”
“Oh, nothing. I kept it three days, then I felt ashamed, confessed, andgave it back.”
“And what then?”
“Naturally I was whipped. But why do you ask? Have you stolen something?”
“I have,” said Mitya, winking slyly.
“What have you stolen?” inquired Pyotr Ilyitch curiously.
“I stole twenty copecks from my mother when I was nine years old, and gaveit back three days after.”
As he said this, Mitya suddenly got up.
“Dmitri Fyodorovitch, won’t you come now?” called Andrey from the door ofthe shop.
“Are you ready? We’ll come!” Mitya started. “A few more last wordsand—Andrey, a glass of vodka at starting. Give him some brandy as well!That box” (the one with the pistols) “put under my seat. Good‐by, PyotrIlyitch, don’t remember evil against me.”
“But you’re coming back to‐morrow?”
“Of course.”
“Will you settle the little bill now?” cried the clerk, springing forward.
“Oh, yes, the bill. Of course.”
He pulled the bundle of notes out of his pocket again, picked out threehundred roubles, threw them on the counter, and ran hurriedly out of theshop. Every one followed him out, bowing and wishing him good luck.Andrey, coughing from the brandy he had just swallowed, jumped up on thebox. But Mitya was only just taking his seat when suddenly to his surprisehe saw Fenya before him. She ran up panting, clasped her hands before himwith a cry, and plumped down at his feet.
“Dmitri Fyodorovitch, dear good Dmitri Fyodorovitch, don’t harm mymistress. And it was I told you all about it.... And don’t murder him, hecame first, he’s hers! He’ll marry Agrafena Alexandrovna now. That’s whyhe’s come back from Siberia. Dmitri Fyodorovitch, dear, don’t take afellow creature’s life!”
“Tut—tut—tut! That’s it, is it? So you’re off there to make trouble!”muttered Pyotr Ilyitch. “Now, it’s all clear, as clear as daylight. DmitriFyodorovitch, give me your pistols at once if you mean to behave like aman,” he shouted aloud to Mitya. “Do you hear, Dmitri?”
“The pistols? Wait a bit, brother, I’ll throw them into the pool on theroad,” answered Mitya. “Fenya, get up, don’t kneel to me. Mitya won’t hurtany one, the silly fool won’t hurt any one again. But I say, Fenya,” heshouted, after having taken his seat. “I hurt you just now, so forgive meand have pity on me, forgive a scoundrel.... But it doesn’t matter if youdon’t. It’s all the same now. Now then, Andrey, look alive, fly along fullspeed!”
Andrey whipped up the horses, and the bells began ringing.
“Good‐by, Pyotr Ilyitch! My last tear is for you!...”
“He’s not drunk, but he keeps babbling like a lunatic,” Pyotr Ilyitchthought as he watched him go. He had half a mind to stay and see the cartpacked with the remaining wines and provisions, knowing that they woulddeceive and defraud Mitya. But, suddenly feeling vexed with himself, heturned away with a curse and went to the tavern to play billiards.
“He’s a fool, though he’s a good fellow,” he muttered as he went. “I’veheard of that officer, Grushenka’s former flame. Well, if he has turnedup.... Ech, those pistols! Damn it all! I’m not his nurse! Let them dowhat they like! Besides, it’ll all come to nothing. They’re a set ofbrawlers, that’s all. They’ll drink and fight, fight and make friendsagain. They are not men who do anything real. What does he mean by ‘I’mstepping aside, I’m punishing myself?’ It’ll come to nothing! He’s shoutedsuch phrases a thousand times, drunk, in the taverns. But now he’s notdrunk. ‘Drunk in spirit’—they’re fond of fine phrases, the villains. Am Ihis nurse? He must have been fighting, his face was all over blood. Withwhom? I shall find out at the ‘Metropolis.’ And his handkerchief wassoaked in blood.... It’s still lying on my floor.... Hang it!”
He reached the tavern in a bad humor and at once made up a game. The gamecheered him. He played a second game, and suddenly began telling one ofhis partners that Dmitri Karamazov had come in for some cashagain—something like three thousand roubles, and had gone to Mokroe againto spend it with Grushenka.... This news roused singular interest in hislisteners. They all spoke of it, not laughing, but with a strange gravity.They left off playing.
“Three thousand? But where can he have got three thousand?”
Questions were asked. The story of Madame Hohlakov’s present was receivedwith skepticism.
“Hasn’t he robbed his old father?—that’s the question.”
“Three thousand! There’s something odd about it.”
“He boasted aloud that he would kill his father; we all heard him, here.And it was three thousand he talked about ...”
Pyotr Ilyitch listened. All at once he became short and dry in hisanswers. He said not a word about the blood on Mitya’s face and hands,though he had meant to speak of it at first.
They began a third game, and by degrees the talk about Mitya died away.But by the end of the third game, Pyotr Ilyitch felt no more desire forbilliards; he laid down the cue, and without having supper as he hadintended, he walked out of the tavern. When he reached the market‐place hestood still in perplexity, wondering at himself. He realized that what hewanted was to go to Fyodor Pavlovitch’s and find out if anything hadhappened there. “On account of some stupid nonsense—as it’s sure to turnout—am I going to wake up the household and make a scandal? Fooh! damn it,is it my business to look after them?”
In a very bad humor he went straight home, and suddenly remembered Fenya.“Damn it all! I ought to have questioned her just now,” he thought withvexation, “I should have heard everything.” And the desire to speak toher, and so find out, became so pressing and importunate that when he washalf‐way home he turned abruptly and went towards the house whereGrushenka lodged. Going up to the gate he knocked. The sound of the knockin the silence of the night sobered him and made him feel annoyed. And noone answered him; every one in the house was asleep.
“And I shall be making a fuss!” he thought, with a feeling of positivediscomfort. But instead of going away altogether, he fell to knockingagain with all his might, filling the street with clamor.
“Not coming? Well, I will knock them up, I will!” he muttered at eachknock, fuming at himself, but at the same time he redoubled his knocks onthe gate.


Chapter VI. “I Am Coming, Too!”

But Dmitri Fyodorovitch was speeding along the road. It was a little morethan twenty versts to Mokroe, but Andrey’s three horses galloped at such apace that the distance might be covered in an hour and a quarter. Theswift motion revived Mitya. The air was fresh and cool, there were bigstars shining in the sky. It was the very night, and perhaps the veryhour, in which Alyosha fell on the earth, and rapturously swore to love itfor ever and ever.
All was confusion, confusion, in Mitya’s soul, but although many thingswere goading his heart, at that moment his whole being was yearning forher, his queen, to whom he was flying to look on her for the last time.One thing I can say for certain; his heart did not waver for one instant.I shall perhaps not be believed when I say that this jealous lover feltnot the slightest jealousy of this new rival, who seemed to have sprungout of the earth. If any other had appeared on the scene, he would havebeen jealous at once, and would perhaps have stained his fierce hands withblood again. But as he flew through the night, he felt no envy, nohostility even, for the man who had been her first lover.... It is true hehad not yet seen him.
“Here there was no room for dispute: it was her right and his; this washer first love which, after five years, she had not forgotten; so she hadloved him only for those five years, and I, how do I come in? What righthave I? Step aside, Mitya, and make way! What am I now? Now everything isover apart from the officer—even if he had not appeared, everything wouldbe over ...”
These words would roughly have expressed his feelings, if he had beencapable of reasoning. But he could not reason at that moment. His presentplan of action had arisen without reasoning. At Fenya’s first words, ithad sprung from feeling, and been adopted in a flash, with all itsconsequences. And yet, in spite of his resolution, there was confusion inhis soul, an agonizing confusion: his resolution did not give him peace.There was so much behind that tortured him. And it seemed strange to him,at moments, to think that he had written his own sentence of death withpen and paper: “I punish myself,” and the paper was lying there in hispocket, ready; the pistol was loaded; he had already resolved how, nextmorning, he would meet the first warm ray of “golden‐haired Phœbus.”
And yet he could not be quit of the past, of all that he had left behindand that tortured him. He felt that miserably, and the thought of it sankinto his heart with despair. There was one moment when he felt an impulseto stop Andrey, to jump out of the cart, to pull out his loaded pistol,and to make an end of everything without waiting for the dawn. But thatmoment flew by like a spark. The horses galloped on, “devouring space,”and as he drew near his goal, again the thought of her, of her alone, tookmore and more complete possession of his soul, chasing away the fearfulimages that had been haunting it. Oh, how he longed to look upon her, ifonly for a moment, if only from a distance!
“She’s now with _him_,” he thought, “now I shall see what she looks likewith him, her first love, and that’s all I want.” Never had this woman,who was such a fateful influence in his life, aroused such love in hisbreast, such new and unknown feeling, surprising even to himself, afeeling tender to devoutness, to self‐effacement before her! “I willefface myself!” he said, in a rush of almost hysterical ecstasy.
They had been galloping nearly an hour. Mitya was silent, and thoughAndrey was, as a rule, a talkative peasant, he did not utter a word,either. He seemed afraid to talk, he only whipped up smartly his threelean, but mettlesome, bay horses. Suddenly Mitya cried out in horribleanxiety:
“Andrey! What if they’re asleep?”
This thought fell upon him like a blow. It had not occurred to him before.
“It may well be that they’re gone to bed, by now, Dmitri Fyodorovitch.”
Mitya frowned as though in pain. Yes, indeed ... he was rushing there ...with such feelings ... while they were asleep ... she was asleep, perhaps,there too.... An angry feeling surged up in his heart.
“Drive on, Andrey! Whip them up! Look alive!” he cried, beside himself.
“But maybe they’re not in bed!” Andrey went on after a pause. “Timofeysaid they were a lot of them there—”
“At the station?”
“Not at the posting‐station, but at Plastunov’s, at the inn, where theylet out horses, too.”
“I know. So you say there are a lot of them? How’s that? Who are they?”cried Mitya, greatly dismayed at this unexpected news.
“Well, Timofey was saying they’re all gentlefolk. Two from our town—whothey are I can’t say—and there are two others, strangers, maybe morebesides. I didn’t ask particularly. They’ve set to playing cards, soTimofey said.”
“Cards?”
“So, maybe they’re not in bed if they’re at cards. It’s most likely notmore than eleven.”
“Quicker, Andrey! Quicker!” Mitya cried again, nervously.
“May I ask you something, sir?” said Andrey, after a pause. “Only I’mafraid of angering you, sir.”
“What is it?”
“Why, Fenya threw herself at your feet just now, and begged you not toharm her mistress, and some one else, too ... so you see, sir— It’s I amtaking you there ... forgive me, sir, it’s my conscience ... maybe it’sstupid of me to speak of it—”
Mitya suddenly seized him by the shoulders from behind.
“Are you a driver?” he asked frantically.
“Yes, sir.”
“Then you know that one has to make way. What would you say to a driverwho wouldn’t make way for any one, but would just drive on and crushpeople? No, a driver mustn’t run over people. One can’t run over a man.One can’t spoil people’s lives. And if you have spoilt a life—punishyourself.... If only you’ve spoilt, if only you’ve ruined any one’slife—punish yourself and go away.”
These phrases burst from Mitya almost hysterically. Though Andrey wassurprised at him, he kept up the conversation.
“That’s right, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, you’re quite right, one mustn’t crushor torment a man, or any kind of creature, for every creature is createdby God. Take a horse, for instance, for some folks, even among us drivers,drive anyhow. Nothing will restrain them, they just force it along.”
“To hell?” Mitya interrupted, and went off into his abrupt, short laugh.“Andrey, simple soul,” he seized him by the shoulders again, “tell me,will Dmitri Fyodorovitch Karamazov go to hell, or not, what do you think?”
“I don’t know, darling, it depends on you, for you are ... you see, sir,when the Son of God was nailed on the Cross and died, He went straightdown to hell from the Cross, and set free all sinners that were in agony.And the devil groaned, because he thought that he would get no moresinners in hell. And God said to him, then, ‘Don’t groan, for you shallhave all the mighty of the earth, the rulers, the chief judges, and therich men, and shall be filled up as you have been in all the ages till Icome again.’ Those were His very words ...”
“A peasant legend! Capital! Whip up the left, Andrey!”
“So you see, sir, who it is hell’s for,” said Andrey, whipping up the lefthorse, “but you’re like a little child ... that’s how we look on you ...and though you’re hasty‐tempered, sir, yet God will forgive you for yourkind heart.”
“And you, do you forgive me, Andrey?”
“What should I forgive you for, sir? You’ve never done me any harm.”
“No, for every one, for every one, you here alone, on the road, will youforgive me for every one? Speak, simple peasant heart!”
“Oh, sir! I feel afraid of driving you, your talk is so strange.”
But Mitya did not hear. He was frantically praying and muttering tohimself.
“Lord, receive me, with all my lawlessness, and do not condemn me. Let mepass by Thy judgment ... do not condemn me, for I have condemned myself,do not condemn me, for I love Thee, O Lord. I am a wretch, but I loveThee. If Thou sendest me to hell, I shall love Thee there, and from thereI shall cry out that I love Thee for ever and ever.... But let me love tothe end.... Here and now for just five hours ... till the first light ofThy day ... for I love the queen of my soul ... I love her and I cannothelp loving her. Thou seest my whole heart.... I shall gallop up, I shallfall before her and say, ‘You are right to pass on and leave me. Farewelland forget your victim ... never fret yourself about me!’ ”
“Mokroe!” cried Andrey, pointing ahead with his whip.
Through the pale darkness of the night loomed a solid black mass ofbuildings, flung down, as it were, in the vast plain. The village ofMokroe numbered two thousand inhabitants, but at that hour all wereasleep, and only here and there a few lights still twinkled.
“Drive on, Andrey, I come!” Mitya exclaimed, feverishly.
“They’re not asleep,” said Andrey again, pointing with his whip to thePlastunovs’ inn, which was at the entrance to the village. The sixwindows, looking on the street, were all brightly lighted up.
“They’re not asleep,” Mitya repeated joyously. “Quicker, Andrey! Gallop!Drive up with a dash! Set the bells ringing! Let all know that I havecome. I’m coming! I’m coming, too!”
Andrey lashed his exhausted team into a gallop, drove with a dash andpulled up his steaming, panting horses at the high flight of steps.
Mitya jumped out of the cart just as the innkeeper, on his way to bed,peeped out from the steps curious to see who had arrived.
“Trifon Borissovitch, is that you?”
The innkeeper bent down, looked intently, ran down the steps, and rushedup to the guest with obsequious delight.
“Dmitri Fyodorovitch, your honor! Do I see you again?”
Trifon Borissovitch was a thick‐set, healthy peasant, of middle height,with a rather fat face. His expression was severe and uncompromising,especially with the peasants of Mokroe, but he had the power of assumingthe most obsequious countenance, when he had an inkling that it was to hisinterest. He dressed in Russian style, with a shirt buttoning down on oneside, and a full‐skirted coat. He had saved a good sum of money, but wasfor ever dreaming of improving his position. More than half the peasantswere in his clutches, every one in the neighborhood was in debt to him.From the neighboring landowners he bought and rented lands which wereworked by the peasants, in payment of debts which they could never shakeoff. He was a widower, with four grown‐up daughters. One of them wasalready a widow and lived in the inn with her two children, hisgrandchildren, and worked for him like a charwoman. Another of hisdaughters was married to a petty official, and in one of the rooms of theinn, on the wall could be seen, among the family photographs, a miniaturephotograph of this official in uniform and official epaulettes. The twoyounger daughters used to wear fashionable blue or green dresses, fittingtight at the back, and with trains a yard long, on Church holidays or whenthey went to pay visits. But next morning they would get up at dawn, asusual, sweep out the rooms with a birch‐broom, empty the slops, and cleanup after lodgers.
In spite of the thousands of roubles he had saved, Trifon Borissovitch wasvery fond of emptying the pockets of a drunken guest, and remembering thatnot a month ago he had, in twenty‐four hours, made two if not threehundred roubles out of Dmitri, when he had come on his escapade withGrushenka, he met him now with eager welcome, scenting his prey the momentMitya drove up to the steps.
“Dmitri Fyodorovitch, dear sir, we see you once more!”
“Stay, Trifon Borissovitch,” began Mitya, “first and foremost, where isshe?”
“Agrafena Alexandrovna?” The inn‐keeper understood at once, lookingsharply into Mitya’s face. “She’s here, too ...”
“With whom? With whom?”
“Some strangers. One is an official gentleman, a Pole, to judge from hisspeech. He sent the horses for her from here; and there’s another withhim, a friend of his, or a fellow traveler, there’s no telling. They’redressed like civilians.”
“Well, are they feasting? Have they money?”
“Poor sort of a feast! Nothing to boast of, Dmitri Fyodorovitch.”
“Nothing to boast of? And who are the others?”
“They’re two gentlemen from the town.... They’ve come back from Tcherny,and are putting up here. One’s quite a young gentleman, a relative of Mr.Miüsov, he must be, but I’ve forgotten his name ... and I expect you knowthe other, too, a gentleman called Maximov. He’s been on a pilgrimage, sohe says, to the monastery in the town. He’s traveling with this youngrelation of Mr. Miüsov.”
“Is that all?”
“Yes.”
“Stay, listen, Trifon Borissovitch. Tell me the chief thing: What of her?How is she?”
“Oh, she’s only just come. She’s sitting with them.”
“Is she cheerful? Is she laughing?”
“No, I think she’s not laughing much. She’s sitting quite dull. She’scombing the young gentleman’s hair.”
“The Pole—the officer?”
“He’s not young, and he’s not an officer, either. Not him, sir. It’s theyoung gentleman that’s Mr. Miüsov’s relation ... I’ve forgotten his name.”
“Kalganov.”
“That’s it, Kalganov!”
“All right. I’ll see for myself. Are they playing cards?”
“They have been playing, but they’ve left off. They’ve been drinking tea,the official gentleman asked for liqueurs.”
“Stay, Trifon Borissovitch, stay, my good soul, I’ll see for myself. Nowanswer one more question: are the gypsies here?”
“You can’t have the gypsies now, Dmitri Fyodorovitch. The authorities havesent them away. But we’ve Jews that play the cymbals and the fiddle in thevillage, so one might send for them. They’d come.”
“Send for them. Certainly send for them!” cried Mitya. “And you can getthe girls together as you did then, Marya especially, Stepanida, too, andArina. Two hundred roubles for a chorus!”
“Oh, for a sum like that I can get all the village together, though by nowthey’re asleep. Are the peasants here worth such kindness, DmitriFyodorovitch, or the girls either? To spend a sum like that on suchcoarseness and rudeness! What’s the good of giving a peasant a cigar tosmoke, the stinking ruffian! And the girls are all lousy. Besides, I’llget my daughters up for nothing, let alone a sum like that. They’ve onlyjust gone to bed, I’ll give them a kick and set them singing for you. Yougave the peasants champagne to drink the other day, e—ech!”
For all his pretended compassion for Mitya, Trifon Borissovitch had hiddenhalf a dozen bottles of champagne on that last occasion, and had picked upa hundred‐rouble note under the table, and it had remained in hisclutches.
“Trifon Borissovitch, I sent more than one thousand flying last time I washere. Do you remember?”
“You did send it flying. I may well remember. You must have left threethousand behind you.”
“Well, I’ve come to do the same again, do you see?”
And he pulled out his roll of notes, and held them up before theinnkeeper’s nose.
“Now, listen and remember. In an hour’s time the wine will arrive,savories, pies, and sweets—bring them all up at once. That box Andrey hasgot is to be brought up at once, too. Open it, and hand champagneimmediately. And the girls, we must have the girls, Marya especially.”
He turned to the cart and pulled out the box of pistols.
“Here, Andrey, let’s settle. Here’s fifteen roubles for the drive, andfifty for vodka ... for your readiness, for your love.... RememberKaramazov!”
“I’m afraid, sir,” faltered Andrey. “Give me five roubles extra, but moreI won’t take. Trifon Borissovitch, bear witness. Forgive my foolish words...”
“What are you afraid of?” asked Mitya, scanning him. “Well, go to thedevil, if that’s it!” he cried, flinging him five roubles. “Now, TrifonBorissovitch, take me up quietly and let me first get a look at them, sothat they don’t see me. Where are they? In the blue room?”
Trifon Borissovitch looked apprehensively at Mitya, but at once obedientlydid his bidding. Leading him into the passage, he went himself into thefirst large room, adjoining that in which the visitors were sitting, andtook the light away. Then he stealthily led Mitya in, and put him in acorner in the dark, whence he could freely watch the company without beingseen. But Mitya did not look long, and, indeed, he could not see them, hesaw her, his heart throbbed violently, and all was dark before his eyes.
She was sitting sideways to the table in a low chair, and beside her, onthe sofa, was the pretty youth, Kalganov. She was holding his hand andseemed to be laughing, while he, seeming vexed and not looking at her, wassaying something in a loud voice to Maximov, who sat the other side of thetable, facing Grushenka. Maximov was laughing violently at something. Onthe sofa sat _he_, and on a chair by the sofa there was another stranger.The one on the sofa was lolling backwards, smoking a pipe, and Mitya hadan impression of a stoutish, broad‐faced, short little man, who wasapparently angry about something. His friend, the other stranger, struckMitya as extraordinarily tall, but he could make out nothing more. Hecaught his breath. He could not bear it for a minute, he put the pistol‐case on a chest, and with a throbbing heart he walked, feeling cold allover, straight into the blue room to face the company.
“Aie!” shrieked Grushenka, the first to notice him.


Chapter VII. The First And Rightful Lover

With his long, rapid strides, Mitya walked straight up to the table.
“Gentlemen,” he said in a loud voice, almost shouting, yet stammering atevery word, “I ... I’m all right! Don’t be afraid!” he exclaimed,“I—there’s nothing the matter,” he turned suddenly to Grushenka, who hadshrunk back in her chair towards Kalganov, and clasped his hand tightly.“I ... I’m coming, too. I’m here till morning. Gentlemen, may I stay withyou till morning? Only till morning, for the last time, in this sameroom?”
So he finished, turning to the fat little man, with the pipe, sitting onthe sofa. The latter removed his pipe from his lips with dignity andobserved severely:
“_Panie_, we’re here in private. There are other rooms.”
“Why, it’s you, Dmitri Fyodorovitch! What do you mean?” answered Kalganovsuddenly. “Sit down with us. How are you?”
“Delighted to see you, dear ... and precious fellow, I always thought alot of you.” Mitya responded, joyfully and eagerly, at once holding outhis hand across the table.
“Aie! How tight you squeeze! You’ve quite broken my fingers,” laughedKalganov.
“He always squeezes like that, always,” Grushenka put in gayly, with atimid smile, seeming suddenly convinced from Mitya’s face that he was notgoing to make a scene. She was watching him with intense curiosity andstill some uneasiness. She was impressed by something about him, andindeed the last thing she expected of him was that he would come in andspeak like this at such a moment.
“Good evening,” Maximov ventured blandly on the left. Mitya rushed up tohim, too.
“Good evening. You’re here, too! How glad I am to find you here, too!Gentlemen, gentlemen, I—” (He addressed the Polish gentleman with the pipeagain, evidently taking him for the most important person present.) “Iflew here.... I wanted to spend my last day, my last hour in this room, inthis very room ... where I, too, adored ... my queen.... Forgive me,_panie_,” he cried wildly, “I flew here and vowed— Oh, don’t be afraid,it’s my last night! Let’s drink to our good understanding. They’ll bringthe wine at once.... I brought this with me.” (Something made him pull outhis bundle of notes.) “Allow me, _panie_! I want to have music, singing, arevel, as we had before. But the worm, the unnecessary worm, will crawlaway, and there’ll be no more of him. I will commemorate my day of joy onmy last night.”
He was almost choking. There was so much, so much he wanted to say, butstrange exclamations were all that came from his lips. The Pole gazedfixedly at him, at the bundle of notes in his hand; looked at Grushenka,and was in evident perplexity.
“If my suverin lady is permitting—” he was beginning.
“What does ‘suverin’ mean? ‘Sovereign,’ I suppose?” interrupted Grushenka.“I can’t help laughing at you, the way you talk. Sit down, Mitya, what areyou talking about? Don’t frighten us, please. You won’t frighten us, willyou? If you won’t, I am glad to see you ...”
“Me, me frighten you?” cried Mitya, flinging up his hands. “Oh, pass meby, go your way, I won’t hinder you!...”
And suddenly he surprised them all, and no doubt himself as well, byflinging himself on a chair, and bursting into tears, turning his headaway to the opposite wall, while his arms clasped the back of the chairtight, as though embracing it.
“Come, come, what a fellow you are!” cried Grushenka reproachfully.“That’s just how he comes to see me—he begins talking, and I can’t makeout what he means. He cried like that once before, and now he’s cryingagain! It’s shameful! Why are you crying? _As though you had anything tocry for!_” she added enigmatically, emphasizing each word with someirritability.
“I ... I’m not crying.... Well, good evening!” He instantly turned roundin his chair, and suddenly laughed, not his abrupt wooden laugh, but along, quivering, inaudible nervous laugh.
“Well, there you are again.... Come, cheer up, cheer up!” Grushenka saidto him persuasively. “I’m very glad you’ve come, very glad, Mitya, do youhear, I’m very glad! I want him to stay here with us,” she saidperemptorily, addressing the whole company, though her words wereobviously meant for the man sitting on the sofa. “I wish it, I wish it!And if he goes away I shall go, too!” she added with flashing eyes.
“What my queen commands is law!” pronounced the Pole, gallantly kissingGrushenka’s hand. “I beg you, _panie_, to join our company,” he addedpolitely, addressing Mitya.
Mitya was jumping up with the obvious intention of delivering anothertirade, but the words did not come.
“Let’s drink, _panie_,” he blurted out instead of making a speech. Everyone laughed.
“Good heavens! I thought he was going to begin again!” Grushenka exclaimednervously. “Do you hear, Mitya,” she went on insistently, “don’t pranceabout, but it’s nice you’ve brought the champagne. I want some myself, andI can’t bear liqueurs. And best of all, you’ve come yourself. We werefearfully dull here.... You’ve come for a spree again, I suppose? But putyour money in your pocket. Where did you get such a lot?”
Mitya had been, all this time, holding in his hand the crumpled bundle ofnotes on which the eyes of all, especially of the Poles, were fixed. Inconfusion he thrust them hurriedly into his pocket. He flushed. At thatmoment the innkeeper brought in an uncorked bottle of champagne, andglasses on a tray. Mitya snatched up the bottle, but he was so bewilderedthat he did not know what to do with it. Kalganov took it from him andpoured out the champagne.
“Another! Another bottle!” Mitya cried to the innkeeper, and, forgettingto clink glasses with the Pole whom he had so solemnly invited to drink totheir good understanding, he drank off his glass without waiting for anyone else. His whole countenance suddenly changed. The solemn and tragicexpression with which he had entered vanished completely, and a look ofsomething childlike came into his face. He seemed to have become suddenlygentle and subdued. He looked shyly and happily at every one, with acontinual nervous little laugh, and the blissful expression of a dog whohas done wrong, been punished, and forgiven. He seemed to have forgotteneverything, and was looking round at every one with a childlike smile ofdelight. He looked at Grushenka, laughing continually, and bringing hischair close up to her. By degrees he had gained some idea of the twoPoles, though he had formed no definite conception of them yet.
The Pole on the sofa struck him by his dignified demeanor and his Polishaccent; and, above all, by his pipe. “Well, what of it? It’s a good thinghe’s smoking a pipe,” he reflected. The Pole’s puffy, middle‐aged face,with its tiny nose and two very thin, pointed, dyed and impudent‐lookingmustaches, had not so far roused the faintest doubts in Mitya. He was noteven particularly struck by the Pole’s absurd wig made in Siberia, withlove‐locks foolishly combed forward over the temples. “I suppose it’s allright since he wears a wig,” he went on, musing blissfully. The other,younger Pole, who was staring insolently and defiantly at the company andlistening to the conversation with silent contempt, still only impressedMitya by his great height, which was in striking contrast to the Pole onthe sofa. “If he stood up he’d be six foot three.” The thought flittedthrough Mitya’s mind. It occurred to him, too, that this Pole must be thefriend of the other, as it were, a “bodyguard,” and no doubt the big Polewas at the disposal of the little Pole with the pipe. But this all seemedto Mitya perfectly right and not to be questioned. In his mood of doglikesubmissiveness all feeling of rivalry had died away.
Grushenka’s mood and the enigmatic tone of some of her words he completelyfailed to grasp. All he understood, with thrilling heart, was that she waskind to him, that she had forgiven him, and made him sit by her. He wasbeside himself with delight, watching her sip her glass of champagne. Thesilence of the company seemed somehow to strike him, however, and helooked round at every one with expectant eyes.
“Why are we sitting here though, gentlemen? Why don’t you begin doingsomething?” his smiling eyes seemed to ask.
“He keeps talking nonsense, and we were all laughing,” Kalganov begansuddenly, as though divining his thought, and pointing to Maximov.
Mitya immediately stared at Kalganov and then at Maximov.
“He’s talking nonsense?” he laughed, his short, wooden laugh, seemingsuddenly delighted at something—“ha ha!”
“Yes. Would you believe it, he will have it that all our cavalry officersin the twenties married Polish women. That’s awful rot, isn’t it?”
“Polish women?” repeated Mitya, perfectly ecstatic.
Kalganov was well aware of Mitya’s attitude to Grushenka, and he guessedabout the Pole, too, but that did not so much interest him, perhaps didnot interest him at all; what he was interested in was Maximov. He hadcome here with Maximov by chance, and he met the Poles here at the inn forthe first time in his life. Grushenka he knew before, and had once beenwith some one to see her; but she had not taken to him. But here shelooked at him very affectionately: before Mitya’s arrival, she had beenmaking much of him, but he seemed somehow to be unmoved by it. He was aboy, not over twenty, dressed like a dandy, with a very charming fair‐skinned face, and splendid thick, fair hair. From his fair face looked outbeautiful pale blue eyes, with an intelligent and sometimes even deepexpression, beyond his age indeed, although the young man sometimes lookedand talked quite like a child, and was not at all ashamed of it, even whenhe was aware of it himself. As a rule he was very willful, evencapricious, though always friendly. Sometimes there was something fixedand obstinate in his expression. He would look at you and listen, seemingall the while to be persistently dreaming over something else. Often hewas listless and lazy, at other times he would grow excited, sometimes,apparently, over the most trivial matters.
“Only imagine, I’ve been taking him about with me for the last four days,”he went on, indolently drawling his words, quite naturally though, withoutthe slightest affectation. “Ever since your brother, do you remember,shoved him off the carriage and sent him flying. That made me take aninterest in him at the time, and I took him into the country, but he keepstalking such rot I’m ashamed to be with him. I’m taking him back.”
“The gentleman has not seen Polish ladies, and says what is impossible,”the Pole with the pipe observed to Maximov.
He spoke Russian fairly well, much better, anyway, than he pretended. Ifhe used Russian words, he always distorted them into a Polish form.
“But I was married to a Polish lady myself,” tittered Maximov.
“But did you serve in the cavalry? You were talking about the cavalry.Were you a cavalry officer?” put in Kalganov at once.
“Was he a cavalry officer indeed? Ha ha!” cried Mitya, listening eagerly,and turning his inquiring eyes to each as he spoke, as though there wereno knowing what he might hear from each.
“No, you see,” Maximov turned to him. “What I mean is that those prettyPolish ladies ... when they danced the mazurka with our Uhlans ... whenone of them dances a mazurka with a Uhlan she jumps on his knee like akitten ... a little white one ... and the _pan_‐father and _pan_‐motherlook on and allow it.... They allow it ... and next day the Uhlan comesand offers her his hand.... That’s how it is ... offers her his hand, hehe!” Maximov ended, tittering.
“The _pan_ is a _lajdak_!” the tall Pole on the chair growled suddenly andcrossed one leg over the other. Mitya’s eye was caught by his huge greasedboot, with its thick, dirty sole. The dress of both the Poles lookedrather greasy.
“Well, now it’s _lajdak_! What’s he scolding about?” said Grushenka,suddenly vexed.
“_Pani_ Agrippina, what the gentleman saw in Poland were servant girls,and not ladies of good birth,” the Pole with the pipe observed toGrushenka.
“You can reckon on that,” the tall Pole snapped contemptuously.
“What next! Let him talk! People talk, why hinder them? It makes itcheerful,” Grushenka said crossly.
“I’m not hindering them, _pani_,” said the Pole in the wig, with a longlook at Grushenka, and relapsing into dignified silence he sucked his pipeagain.
“No, no. The Polish gentleman spoke the truth.” Kalganov got excitedagain, as though it were a question of vast import. “He’s never been inPoland, so how can he talk about it? I suppose you weren’t married inPoland, were you?”
“No, in the Province of Smolensk. Only, a Uhlan had brought her to Russiabefore that, my future wife, with her mamma and her aunt, and anotherfemale relation with a grown‐up son. He brought her straight from Polandand gave her up to me. He was a lieutenant in our regiment, a very niceyoung man. At first he meant to marry her himself. But he didn’t marryher, because she turned out to be lame.”
“So you married a lame woman?” cried Kalganov.
“Yes. They both deceived me a little bit at the time, and concealed it. Ithought she was hopping; she kept hopping.... I thought it was for fun.”
“So pleased she was going to marry you!” yelled Kalganov, in a ringing,childish voice.
“Yes, so pleased. But it turned out to be quite a different cause.Afterwards, when we were married, after the wedding, that very evening,she confessed, and very touchingly asked forgiveness. ‘I once jumped overa puddle when I was a child,’ she said, ‘and injured my leg.’ He he!”
Kalganov went off into the most childish laughter, almost falling on thesofa. Grushenka, too, laughed. Mitya was at the pinnacle of happiness.
“Do you know, that’s the truth, he’s not lying now,” exclaimed Kalganov,turning to Mitya; “and do you know, he’s been married twice; it’s hisfirst wife he’s talking about. But his second wife, do you know, ran away,and is alive now.”
“Is it possible?” said Mitya, turning quickly to Maximov with anexpression of the utmost astonishment.
“Yes. She did run away. I’ve had that unpleasant experience,” Maximovmodestly assented, “with a _monsieur_. And what was worse, she’d had allmy little property transferred to her beforehand. ‘You’re an educatedman,’ she said to me. ‘You can always get your living.’ She settled mybusiness with that. A venerable bishop once said to me: ‘One of your wiveswas lame, but the other was too light‐footed.’ He he!”
“Listen, listen!” cried Kalganov, bubbling over, “if he’s telling lies—andhe often is—he’s only doing it to amuse us all. There’s no harm in that,is there? You know, I sometimes like him. He’s awfully low, but it’snatural to him, eh? Don’t you think so? Some people are low from self‐interest, but he’s simply so, from nature. Only fancy, he claims (he wasarguing about it all the way yesterday) that Gogol wrote _Dead Souls_about him. Do you remember, there’s a landowner called Maximov in it, whomNozdryov thrashed. He was charged, do you remember, ‘for inflicting bodilyinjury with rods on the landowner Maximov in a drunken condition.’ Wouldyou believe it, he claims that he was that Maximov and that he was beaten!Now can it be so? Tchitchikov made his journey, at the very latest, at thebeginning of the twenties, so that the dates don’t fit. He couldn’t havebeen thrashed then, he couldn’t, could he?”
It was difficult to imagine what Kalganov was excited about, but hisexcitement was genuine. Mitya followed his lead without protest.
“Well, but if they did thrash him!” he cried, laughing.
“It’s not that they thrashed me exactly, but what I mean is—” put inMaximov.
“What do you mean? Either they thrashed you or they didn’t.”
“What o’clock is it, _panie_?” the Pole, with the pipe, asked his tallfriend, with a bored expression. The other shrugged his shoulders inreply. Neither of them had a watch.
“Why not talk? Let other people talk. Mustn’t other people talk becauseyou’re bored?” Grushenka flew at him with evident intention of findingfault. Something seemed for the first time to flash upon Mitya’s mind.This time the Pole answered with unmistakable irritability.
“_Pani_, I didn’t oppose it. I didn’t say anything.”
“All right then. Come, tell us your story,” Grushenka cried to Maximov.“Why are you all silent?”
“There’s nothing to tell, it’s all so foolish,” answered Maximov at once,with evident satisfaction, mincing a little. “Besides, all that’s by wayof allegory in Gogol, for he’s made all the names have a meaning. Nozdryovwas really called Nosov, and Kuvshinikov had quite a different name, hewas called Shkvornev. Fenardi really was called Fenardi, only he wasn’t anItalian but a Russian, and Mamsel Fenardi was a pretty girl with herpretty little legs in tights, and she had a little short skirt withspangles, and she kept turning round and round, only not for four hoursbut for four minutes only, and she bewitched every one...”
“But what were you beaten for?” cried Kalganov.
“For Piron!” answered Maximov.
“What Piron?” cried Mitya.
“The famous French writer, Piron. We were all drinking then, a big partyof us, in a tavern at that very fair. They’d invited me, and first of allI began quoting epigrams. ‘Is that you, Boileau? What a funny get‐up!’ andBoileau answers that he’s going to a masquerade, that is to the baths, hehe! And they took it to themselves, so I made haste to repeat another,very sarcastic, well known to all educated people:

    Yes, Sappho and Phaon are we!    But one grief is weighing on me.    You don’t know your way to the sea!

They were still more offended and began abusing me in the most unseemlyway for it. And as ill‐luck would have it, to set things right, I begantelling a very cultivated anecdote about Piron, how he was not acceptedinto the French Academy, and to revenge himself wrote his own epitaph:

    Ci‐gît Piron qui ne fut rien,    Pas même académicien.

They seized me and thrashed me.”
“But what for? What for?”
“For my education. People can thrash a man for anything,” Maximovconcluded, briefly and sententiously.
“Eh, that’s enough! That’s all stupid, I don’t want to listen. I thoughtit would be amusing,” Grushenka cut them short, suddenly.
Mitya started, and at once left off laughing. The tall Pole rose upon hisfeet, and with the haughty air of a man, bored and out of his element,began pacing from corner to corner of the room, his hands behind his back.
“Ah, he can’t sit still,” said Grushenka, looking at him contemptuously.Mitya began to feel anxious. He noticed besides, that the Pole on the sofawas looking at him with an irritable expression.
“_Panie!_” cried Mitya, “let’s drink! and the other _pan_, too! Let usdrink.”
In a flash he had pulled three glasses towards him, and filled them withchampagne.
“To Poland, _panovie_, I drink to your Poland!” cried Mitya.
“I shall be delighted, _panie_,” said the Pole on the sofa, with dignityand affable condescension, and he took his glass.
“And the other _pan_, what’s his name? Drink, most illustrious, take yourglass!” Mitya urged.
“Pan Vrublevsky,” put in the Pole on the sofa.
Pan Vrublevsky came up to the table, swaying as he walked.
“To Poland, _panovie!_” cried Mitya, raising his glass. “Hurrah!”
All three drank. Mitya seized the bottle and again poured out threeglasses.
“Now to Russia, _panovie_, and let us be brothers!”
“Pour out some for us,” said Grushenka; “I’ll drink to Russia, too!”
“So will I,” said Kalganov.
“And I would, too ... to Russia, the old grandmother!” tittered Maximov.
“All! All!” cried Mitya. “Trifon Borissovitch, some more bottles!”
The other three bottles Mitya had brought with him were put on the table.Mitya filled the glasses.
“To Russia! Hurrah!” he shouted again. All drank the toast except thePoles, and Grushenka tossed off her whole glass at once. The Poles did nottouch theirs.
“How’s this, _panovie_?” cried Mitya, “won’t you drink it?”
Pan Vrublevsky took the glass, raised it and said with a resonant voice:
“To Russia as she was before 1772.”
“Come, that’s better!” cried the other Pole, and they both emptied theirglasses at once.
“You’re fools, you _panovie_,” broke suddenly from Mitya.
“_Panie!_” shouted both the Poles, menacingly, setting on Mitya like acouple of cocks. Pan Vrublevsky was specially furious.
“Can one help loving one’s own country?” he shouted.
“Be silent! Don’t quarrel! I won’t have any quarreling!” cried Grushenkaimperiously, and she stamped her foot on the floor. Her face glowed, hereyes were shining. The effects of the glass she had just drunk wereapparent. Mitya was terribly alarmed.
“_Panovie_, forgive me! It was my fault, I’m sorry. Vrublevsky, _panie_Vrublevsky, I’m sorry.”
“Hold your tongue, you, anyway! Sit down, you stupid!” Grushenka scoldedwith angry annoyance.
Every one sat down, all were silent, looking at one another.
“Gentlemen, I was the cause of it all,” Mitya began again, unable to makeanything of Grushenka’s words. “Come, why are we sitting here? What shallwe do ... to amuse ourselves again?”
“Ach, it’s certainly anything but amusing!” Kalganov mumbled lazily.
“Let’s play faro again, as we did just now,” Maximov tittered suddenly.
“Faro? Splendid!” cried Mitya. “If only the _panovie_—”
“It’s lite, _panovie_,” the Pole on the sofa responded, as it wereunwillingly.
“That’s true,” assented Pan Vrublevsky.
“Lite? What do you mean by ‘lite’?” asked Grushenka.
“Late, _pani_! ‘a late hour’ I mean,” the Pole on the sofa explained.
“It’s always late with them. They can never do anything!” Grushenka almostshrieked in her anger. “They’re dull themselves, so they want others to bedull. Before you came, Mitya, they were just as silent and kept turning uptheir noses at me.”
“My goddess!” cried the Pole on the sofa, “I see you’re not well‐disposedto me, that’s why I’m gloomy. I’m ready, _panie_,” added he, addressingMitya.
“Begin, _panie_,” Mitya assented, pulling his notes out of his pocket, andlaying two hundred‐rouble notes on the table. “I want to lose a lot toyou. Take your cards. Make the bank.”
“We’ll have cards from the landlord, _panie_,” said the little Pole,gravely and emphatically.
“That’s much the best way,” chimed in Pan Vrublevsky.
“From the landlord? Very good, I understand, let’s get them from him.Cards!” Mitya shouted to the landlord.
The landlord brought in a new, unopened pack, and informed Mitya that thegirls were getting ready, and that the Jews with the cymbals would mostlikely be here soon; but the cart with the provisions had not yet arrived.Mitya jumped up from the table and ran into the next room to give orders,but only three girls had arrived, and Marya was not there yet. And he didnot know himself what orders to give and why he had run out. He only toldthem to take out of the box the presents for the girls, the sweets, thetoffee and the fondants. “And vodka for Andrey, vodka for Andrey!” hecried in haste. “I was rude to Andrey!”
Suddenly Maximov, who had followed him out, touched him on the shoulder.
“Give me five roubles,” he whispered to Mitya. “I’ll stake something atfaro, too, he he!”
“Capital! Splendid! Take ten, here!”
Again he took all the notes out of his pocket and picked out one for tenroubles. “And if you lose that, come again, come again.”
“Very good,” Maximov whispered joyfully, and he ran back again. Mitya,too, returned, apologizing for having kept them waiting. The Poles hadalready sat down, and opened the pack. They looked much more amiable,almost cordial. The Pole on the sofa had lighted another pipe and waspreparing to throw. He wore an air of solemnity.
“To your places, gentlemen,” cried Pan Vrublevsky.
“No, I’m not going to play any more,” observed Kalganov, “I’ve lost fiftyroubles to them just now.”
“The _pan_ had no luck, perhaps he’ll be lucky this time,” the Pole on thesofa observed in his direction.
“How much in the bank? To correspond?” asked Mitya.
“That’s according, _panie_, maybe a hundred, maybe two hundred, as much asyou will stake.”
“A million!” laughed Mitya.
“The Pan Captain has heard of Pan Podvysotsky, perhaps?”
“What Podvysotsky?”
“In Warsaw there was a bank and any one comes and stakes against it.Podvysotsky comes, sees a thousand gold pieces, stakes against the bank.The banker says, ‘_Panie_ Podvysotsky, are you laying down the gold, ormust we trust to your honor?’ ‘To my honor, _panie_,’ says Podvysotsky.‘So much the better.’ The banker throws the dice. Podvysotsky wins. ‘Takeit, _panie_,’ says the banker, and pulling out the drawer he gives him amillion. ‘Take it, _panie_, this is your gain.’ There was a million in thebank. ‘I didn’t know that,’ says Podvysotsky. ‘_Panie_ Podvysotsky,’ saidthe banker, ‘you pledged your honor and we pledged ours.’ Podvysotsky tookthe million.”
“That’s not true,” said Kalganov.
“_Panie_ Kalganov, in gentlemanly society one doesn’t say such things.”
“As if a Polish gambler would give away a million!” cried Mitya, butchecked himself at once. “Forgive me, _panie_, it’s my fault again, hewould, he would give away a million, for honor, for Polish honor. You seehow I talk Polish, ha ha! Here, I stake ten roubles, the knave leads.”
“And I put a rouble on the queen, the queen of hearts, the pretty little_panienotchka_, he he!” laughed Maximov, pulling out his queen, and, asthough trying to conceal it from every one, he moved right up and crossedhimself hurriedly under the table. Mitya won. The rouble won, too.
“A corner!” cried Mitya.
“I’ll bet another rouble, a ‘single’ stake,” Maximov muttered gleefully,hugely delighted at having won a rouble.
“Lost!” shouted Mitya. “A ‘double’ on the seven!”
The seven too was trumped.
“Stop!” cried Kalganov suddenly.
“Double! Double!” Mitya doubled his stakes, and each time he doubled thestake, the card he doubled was trumped by the Poles. The rouble stakeskept winning.
“On the double!” shouted Mitya furiously.
“You’ve lost two hundred, _panie_. Will you stake another hundred?” thePole on the sofa inquired.
“What? Lost two hundred already? Then another two hundred! All doubles!”
And pulling his money out of his pocket, Mitya was about to fling twohundred roubles on the queen, but Kalganov covered it with his hand.
“That’s enough!” he shouted in his ringing voice.
“What’s the matter?” Mitya stared at him.
“That’s enough! I don’t want you to play any more. Don’t!”
“Why?”
“Because I don’t. Hang it, come away. That’s why. I won’t let you go onplaying.”
Mitya gazed at him in astonishment.
“Give it up, Mitya. He may be right. You’ve lost a lot as it is,” saidGrushenka, with a curious note in her voice. Both the Poles rose fromtheir seats with a deeply offended air.
“Are you joking, _panie_?” said the short man, looking severely atKalganov.
“How dare you!” Pan Vrublevsky, too, growled at Kalganov.
“Don’t dare to shout like that,” cried Grushenka. “Ah, you turkey‐cocks!”
Mitya looked at each of them in turn. But something in Grushenka’s facesuddenly struck him, and at the same instant something new flashed intohis mind—a strange new thought!
“_Pani_ Agrippina,” the little Pole was beginning, crimson with anger,when Mitya suddenly went up to him and slapped him on the shoulder.
“Most illustrious, two words with you.”
“What do you want?”
“In the next room, I’ve two words to say to you, something pleasant, verypleasant. You’ll be glad to hear it.”
The little _pan_ was taken aback and looked apprehensively at Mitya. Heagreed at once, however, on condition that Pan Vrublevsky went with them.
“The bodyguard? Let him come, and I want him, too. I must have him!” criedMitya. “March, _panovie_!”
“Where are you going?” asked Grushenka, anxiously.
“We’ll be back in one moment,” answered Mitya.
There was a sort of boldness, a sudden confidence shining in his eyes. Hisface had looked very different when he entered the room an hour before.
He led the Poles, not into the large room where the chorus of girls wasassembling and the table was being laid, but into the bedroom on theright, where the trunks and packages were kept, and there were two largebeds, with pyramids of cotton pillows on each. There was a lighted candleon a small deal table in the corner. The small man and Mitya sat down tothis table, facing each other, while the huge Vrublevsky stood besidethem, his hands behind his back. The Poles looked severe but wereevidently inquisitive.
“What can I do for you, _panie_?” lisped the little Pole.
“Well, look here, _panie_, I won’t keep you long. There’s money for you,”he pulled out his notes. “Would you like three thousand? Take it and goyour way.”
The Pole gazed open‐eyed at Mitya, with a searching look.
“Three thousand, _panie_?” He exchanged glances with Vrublevsky.
“Three, _panovie_, three! Listen, _panie_, I see you’re a sensible man.Take three thousand and go to the devil, and Vrublevsky with you—d’youhear? But, at once, this very minute, and for ever. You understand that,_panie_, for ever. Here’s the door, you go out of it. What have you gotthere, a great‐coat, a fur coat? I’ll bring it out to you. They’ll get thehorses out directly, and then—good‐by, _panie_!”
Mitya awaited an answer with assurance. He had no doubts. An expression ofextraordinary resolution passed over the Pole’s face.
“And the money, _panie_?”
“The money, _panie_? Five hundred roubles I’ll give you this moment forthe journey, and as a first installment, and two thousand five hundred to‐morrow, in the town—I swear on my honor, I’ll get it, I’ll get it at anycost!” cried Mitya.
The Poles exchanged glances again. The short man’s face looked moreforbidding.
“Seven hundred, seven hundred, not five hundred, at once, this minute,cash down!” Mitya added, feeling something wrong. “What’s the matter,_panie_? Don’t you trust me? I can’t give you the whole three thousandstraight off. If I give it, you may come back to her to‐morrow....Besides, I haven’t the three thousand with me. I’ve got it at home in thetown,” faltered Mitya, his spirit sinking at every word he uttered. “Uponmy word, the money’s there, hidden.”
In an instant an extraordinary sense of personal dignity showed itself inthe little man’s face.
“What next?” he asked ironically. “For shame!” and he spat on the floor.Pan Vrublevsky spat too.
“You do that, _panie_,” said Mitya, recognizing with despair that all wasover, “because you hope to make more out of Grushenka? You’re a couple ofcapons, that’s what you are!”
“This is a mortal insult!” The little Pole turned as red as a crab, and hewent out of the room, briskly, as though unwilling to hear another word.Vrublevsky swung out after him, and Mitya followed, confused andcrestfallen. He was afraid of Grushenka, afraid that the _pan_ would atonce raise an outcry. And so indeed he did. The Pole walked into the roomand threw himself in a theatrical attitude before Grushenka.
“_Pani_ Agrippina, I have received a mortal insult!” he exclaimed. ButGrushenka suddenly lost all patience, as though they had wounded her inthe tenderest spot.
“Speak Russian! Speak Russian!” she cried, “not another word of Polish!You used to talk Russian. You can’t have forgotten it in five years.”
She was red with passion.
“_Pani_ Agrippina—”
“My name’s Agrafena, Grushenka, speak Russian or I won’t listen!”
The Pole gasped with offended dignity, and quickly and pompously deliveredhimself in broken Russian:
“_Pani_ Agrafena, I came here to forget the past and forgive it, to forgetall that has happened till to‐day—”
“Forgive? Came here to forgive me?” Grushenka cut him short, jumping upfrom her seat.
“Just so, _pani_, I’m not pusillanimous, I’m magnanimous. But I wasastounded when I saw your lovers. Pan Mitya offered me three thousand, inthe other room to depart. I spat in the _pan’s_ face.”
“What? He offered you money for me?” cried Grushenka, hysterically. “Is ittrue, Mitya? How dare you? Am I for sale?”
“_Panie, panie!_” yelled Mitya, “she’s pure and shining, and I have neverbeen her lover! That’s a lie....”
“How dare you defend me to him?” shrieked Grushenka. “It wasn’t virtuekept me pure, and it wasn’t that I was afraid of Kuzma, but that I mighthold up my head when I met him, and tell him he’s a scoundrel. And he didactually refuse the money?”
“He took it! He took it!” cried Mitya; “only he wanted to get the wholethree thousand at once, and I could only give him seven hundred straightoff.”
“I see: he heard I had money, and came here to marry me!”
“_Pani_ Agrippina!” cried the little Pole. “I’m—a knight, I’m—a nobleman,and not a _lajdak_. I came here to make you my wife and I find you adifferent woman, perverse and shameless.”
“Oh, go back where you came from! I’ll tell them to turn you out andyou’ll be turned out,” cried Grushenka, furious. “I’ve been a fool, afool, to have been miserable these five years! And it wasn’t for his sake,it was my anger made me miserable. And this isn’t he at all! Was he likethis? It might be his father! Where did you get your wig from? He was afalcon, but this is a gander. He used to laugh and sing to me.... And I’vebeen crying for five years, damned fool, abject, shameless I was!”
She sank back in her low chair and hid her face in her hands. At thatinstant the chorus of Mokroe began singing in the room on the left—arollicking dance song.
“A regular Sodom!” Vrublevsky roared suddenly. “Landlord, send theshameless hussies away!”
The landlord, who had been for some time past inquisitively peeping in atthe door, hearing shouts and guessing that his guests were quarreling, atonce entered the room.
“What are you shouting for? D’you want to split your throat?” he said,addressing Vrublevsky, with surprising rudeness.
“Animal!” bellowed Pan Vrublevsky.
“Animal? And what sort of cards were you playing with just now? I gave youa pack and you hid it. You played with marked cards! I could send you toSiberia for playing with false cards, d’you know that, for it’s just thesame as false banknotes....”
And going up to the sofa he thrust his fingers between the sofa back andthe cushion, and pulled out an unopened pack of cards.
“Here’s my pack unopened!”
He held it up and showed it to all in the room. “From where I stood I sawhim slip my pack away, and put his in place of it—you’re a cheat and not agentleman!”
“And I twice saw the _pan_ change a card!” cried Kalganov.
“How shameful! How shameful!” exclaimed Grushenka, clasping her hands, andblushing for genuine shame. “Good Lord, he’s come to that!”
“I thought so, too!” said Mitya. But before he had uttered the words,Vrublevsky, with a confused and infuriated face, shook his fist atGrushenka, shouting:
“You low harlot!”
Mitya flew at him at once, clutched him in both hands, lifted him in theair, and in one instant had carried him into the room on the right, fromwhich they had just come.
“I’ve laid him on the floor, there,” he announced, returning at once,gasping with excitement. “He’s struggling, the scoundrel! But he won’tcome back, no fear of that!...”
He closed one half of the folding doors, and holding the other ajar calledout to the little Pole:
“Most illustrious, will you be pleased to retire as well?”
“My dear Dmitri Fyodorovitch,” said Trifon Borissovitch, “make them giveyou back the money you lost. It’s as good as stolen from you.”
“I don’t want my fifty roubles back,” Kalganov declared suddenly.
“I don’t want my two hundred, either,” cried Mitya, “I wouldn’t take itfor anything! Let him keep it as a consolation.”
“Bravo, Mitya! You’re a trump, Mitya!” cried Grushenka, and there was anote of fierce anger in the exclamation.
The little _pan_, crimson with fury but still mindful of his dignity, wasmaking for the door, but he stopped short and said suddenly, addressingGrushenka:
“_Pani_, if you want to come with me, come. If not, good‐by.”
And swelling with indignation and importance he went to the door. This wasa man of character: he had so good an opinion of himself that after allthat had passed, he still expected that she would marry him. Mitya slammedthe door after him.
“Lock it,” said Kalganov. But the key clicked on the other side, they hadlocked it from within.
“That’s capital!” exclaimed Grushenka relentlessly. “Serve them right!”


Chapter VIII. Delirium

What followed was almost an orgy, a feast to which all were welcome.Grushenka was the first to call for wine.
“I want to drink. I want to be quite drunk, as we were before. Do youremember, Mitya, do you remember how we made friends here last time!”
Mitya himself was almost delirious, feeling that his happiness was athand. But Grushenka was continually sending him away from her.
“Go and enjoy yourself. Tell them to dance, to make merry, ‘let the stoveand cottage dance’; as we had it last time,” she kept exclaiming. She wastremendously excited. And Mitya hastened to obey her. The chorus were inthe next room. The room in which they had been sitting till that momentwas too small, and was divided in two by cotton curtains, behind which wasa huge bed with a puffy feather mattress and a pyramid of cotton pillows.In the four rooms for visitors there were beds. Grushenka settled herselfjust at the door. Mitya set an easy chair for her. She had sat in the sameplace to watch the dancing and singing “the time before,” when they hadmade merry there. All the girls who had come had been there then; theJewish band with fiddles and zithers had come, too, and at last the longexpected cart had arrived with the wines and provisions.
Mitya bustled about. All sorts of people began coming into the room tolook on, peasants and their women, who had been roused from sleep andattracted by the hopes of another marvelous entertainment such as they hadenjoyed a month before. Mitya remembered their faces, greeting andembracing every one he knew. He uncorked bottles and poured out wine forevery one who presented himself. Only the girls were very eager for thechampagne. The men preferred rum, brandy, and, above all, hot punch. Mityahad chocolate made for all the girls, and ordered that three samovarsshould be kept boiling all night to provide tea and punch for everyone tohelp himself.
An absurd chaotic confusion followed, but Mitya was in his naturalelement, and the more foolish it became, the more his spirits rose. If thepeasants had asked him for money at that moment, he would have pulled outhis notes and given them away right and left. This was probably why thelandlord, Trifon Borissovitch, kept hovering about Mitya to protect him.He seemed to have given up all idea of going to bed that night; but hedrank little, only one glass of punch, and kept a sharp look‐out onMitya’s interests after his own fashion. He intervened in the nick oftime, civilly and obsequiously persuading Mitya not to give away “cigarsand Rhine wine,” and, above all, money to the peasants as he had donebefore. He was very indignant, too, at the peasant girls drinking liqueur,and eating sweets.
“They’re a lousy lot, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,” he said. “I’d give them akick, every one of them, and they’d take it as an honor—that’s all they’reworth!”
Mitya remembered Andrey again, and ordered punch to be sent out to him. “Iwas rude to him just now,” he repeated with a sinking, softened voice.Kalganov did not want to drink, and at first did not care for the girls’singing; but after he had drunk a couple of glasses of champagne he becameextraordinarily lively, strolling about the room, laughing and praisingthe music and the songs, admiring every one and everything. Maximov,blissfully drunk, never left his side. Grushenka, too, was beginning toget drunk. Pointing to Kalganov, she said to Mitya:
“What a dear, charming boy he is!”
And Mitya, delighted, ran to kiss Kalganov and Maximov. Oh, great were hishopes! She had said nothing yet, and seemed, indeed, purposely to refrainfrom speaking. But she looked at him from time to time with caressing andpassionate eyes. At last she suddenly gripped his hand and drew himvigorously to her. She was sitting at the moment in the low chair by thedoor.
“How was it you came just now, eh? Have you walked in!... I wasfrightened. So you wanted to give me up to him, did you? Did you reallywant to?”
“I didn’t want to spoil your happiness!” Mitya faltered blissfully. Butshe did not need his answer.
“Well, go and enjoy yourself ...” she sent him away once more. “Don’t cry,I’ll call you back again.”
He would run away, and she listened to the singing and looked at thedancing, though her eyes followed him wherever he went. But in anotherquarter of an hour she would call him once more and again he would runback to her.
“Come, sit beside me, tell me, how did you hear about me, and my cominghere yesterday? From whom did you first hear it?”
And Mitya began telling her all about it, disconnectedly, incoherently,feverishly. He spoke strangely, often frowning, and stopping abruptly.
“What are you frowning at?” she asked.
“Nothing.... I left a man ill there. I’d give ten years of my life for himto get well, to know he was all right!”
“Well, never mind him, if he’s ill. So you meant to shoot yourself to‐morrow! What a silly boy! What for? I like such reckless fellows as you,”she lisped, with a rather halting tongue. “So you would go any length forme, eh? Did you really mean to shoot yourself to‐morrow, you stupid? No,wait a little. To‐morrow I may have something to say to you.... I won’tsay it to‐day, but to‐morrow. You’d like it to be to‐day? No, I don’t wantto to‐day. Come, go along now, go and amuse yourself.”
Once, however, she called him, as it were, puzzled and uneasy.
“Why are you sad? I see you’re sad.... Yes, I see it,” she added, lookingintently into his eyes. “Though you keep kissing the peasants andshouting, I see something. No, be merry. I’m merry; you be merry, too....I love somebody here. Guess who it is. Ah, look, my boy has fallen asleep,poor dear, he’s drunk.”
She meant Kalganov. He was, in fact, drunk, and had dropped asleep for amoment, sitting on the sofa. But he was not merely drowsy from drink; hefelt suddenly dejected, or, as he said, “bored.” He was intenselydepressed by the girls’ songs, which, as the drinking went on, graduallybecame coarse and more reckless. And the dances were as bad. Two girlsdressed up as bears, and a lively girl, called Stepanida, with a stick inher hand, acted the part of keeper, and began to “show them.”
“Look alive, Marya, or you’ll get the stick!”
The bears rolled on the ground at last in the most unseemly fashion, amidroars of laughter from the closely‐packed crowd of men and women.
“Well, let them! Let them!” said Grushenka sententiously, with an ecstaticexpression on her face. “When they do get a day to enjoy themselves, whyshouldn’t folks be happy?”
Kalganov looked as though he had been besmirched with dirt.
“It’s swinish, all this peasant foolery,” he murmured, moving away; “it’sthe game they play when it’s light all night in summer.”
He particularly disliked one “new” song to a jaunty dance‐tune. Itdescribed how a gentleman came and tried his luck with the girls, to seewhether they would love him:

    The master came to try the girls:    Would they love him, would they not?

But the girls could not love the master:

    He would beat me cruelly    And such love won’t do for me.

Then a gypsy comes along and he, too, tries:

    The gypsy came to try the girls:    Would they love him, would they not?

But they couldn’t love the gypsy either:

    He would be a thief, I fear,    And would cause me many a tear.

And many more men come to try their luck, among them a soldier:

    The soldier came to try the girls:    Would they love him, would they not?

But the soldier is rejected with contempt, in two indecent lines, sungwith absolute frankness and producing a furore in the audience. The songends with a merchant:

    The merchant came to try the girls:    Would they love him, would they not?

And it appears that he wins their love because:

    The merchant will make gold for me    And his queen I’ll gladly be.

Kalvanov was positively indignant.
“That’s just a song of yesterday,” he said aloud. “Who writes such thingsfor them? They might just as well have had a railwayman or a Jew come totry his luck with the girls; they’d have carried all before them.”
And, almost as though it were a personal affront, he declared, on thespot, that he was bored, sat down on the sofa and immediately fell asleep.His pretty little face looked rather pale, as it fell back on the sofacushion.
“Look how pretty he is,” said Grushenka, taking Mitya up to him. “I wascombing his hair just now; his hair’s like flax, and so thick....”
And, bending over him tenderly, she kissed his forehead. Kalganovinstantly opened his eyes, looked at her, stood up, and with the mostanxious air inquired where was Maximov?
“So that’s who it is you want.” Grushenka laughed. “Stay with me a minute.Mitya, run and find his Maximov.”
Maximov, it appeared, could not tear himself away from the girls, onlyrunning away from time to time to pour himself out a glass of liqueur. Hehad drunk two cups of chocolate. His face was red, and his nose wascrimson; his eyes were moist and mawkishly sweet. He ran up and announcedthat he was going to dance the “sabotière.”
“They taught me all those well‐bred, aristocratic dances when I waslittle....”
“Go, go with him, Mitya, and I’ll watch from here how he dances,” saidGrushenka.
“No, no, I’m coming to look on, too,” exclaimed Kalganov, brushing asidein the most naïve way Grushenka’s offer to sit with him. They all went tolook on. Maximov danced his dance. But it roused no great admiration inany one but Mitya. It consisted of nothing but skipping and hopping,kicking up the feet, and at every skip Maximov slapped the upturned soleof his foot. Kalganov did not like it at all, but Mitya kissed the dancer.
“Thanks. You’re tired perhaps? What are you looking for here? Would youlike some sweets? A cigar, perhaps?”
“A cigarette.”
“Don’t you want a drink?”
“I’ll just have a liqueur.... Have you any chocolates?”
“Yes, there’s a heap of them on the table there. Choose one, my dearsoul!”
“I like one with vanilla ... for old people. He he!”
“No, brother, we’ve none of that special sort.”
“I say,” the old man bent down to whisper in Mitya’s ear. “That girlthere, little Marya, he he! How would it be if you were to help me makefriends with her?”
“So that’s what you’re after! No, brother, that won’t do!”
“I’d do no harm to any one,” Maximov muttered disconsolately.
“Oh, all right, all right. They only come here to dance and sing, youknow, brother. But damn it all, wait a bit!... Eat and drink and be merry,meanwhile. Don’t you want money?”
“Later on, perhaps,” smiled Maximov.
“All right, all right....”
Mitya’s head was burning. He went outside to the wooden balcony which ranround the whole building on the inner side, overlooking the courtyard. Thefresh air revived him. He stood alone in a dark corner, and suddenlyclutched his head in both hands. His scattered thoughts came together; hissensations blended into a whole and threw a sudden light into his mind. Afearful and terrible light! “If I’m to shoot myself, why not now?” passedthrough his mind. “Why not go for the pistols, bring them here, and here,in this dark dirty corner, make an end?” Almost a minute he stood,undecided. A few hours earlier, when he had been dashing here, he waspursued by disgrace, by the theft he had committed, and that blood, thatblood!... But yet it was easier for him then. Then everything was over: hehad lost her, given her up. She was gone, for him—oh, then his deathsentence had been easier for him; at least it had seemed necessary,inevitable, for what had he to stay on earth for?
But now? Was it the same as then? Now one phantom, one terror at least wasat an end: that first, rightful lover, that fateful figure had vanished,leaving no trace. The terrible phantom had turned into something so small,so comic; it had been carried into the bedroom and locked in. It wouldnever return. She was ashamed, and from her eyes he could see now whom sheloved. Now he had everything to make life happy ... but he could not go onliving, he could not; oh, damnation! “O God! restore to life the man Iknocked down at the fence! Let this fearful cup pass from me! Lord, thouhast wrought miracles for such sinners as me! But what, what if the oldman’s alive? Oh, then the shame of the other disgrace I would wipe away. Iwould restore the stolen money. I’d give it back; I’d get it somehow....No trace of that shame will remain except in my heart for ever! But no,no; oh, impossible cowardly dreams! Oh, damnation!”
Yet there was a ray of light and hope in his darkness. He jumped up andran back to the room—to her, to her, his queen for ever! Was not onemoment of her love worth all the rest of life, even in the agonies ofdisgrace? This wild question clutched at his heart. “To her, to her alone,to see her, to hear her, to think of nothing, to forget everything, ifonly for that night, for an hour, for a moment!” Just as he turned fromthe balcony into the passage, he came upon the landlord, TrifonBorissovitch. He thought he looked gloomy and worried, and fancied he hadcome to find him.
“What is it, Trifon Borissovitch? are you looking for me?”
“No, sir.” The landlord seemed disconcerted. “Why should I be looking foryou? Where have you been?”
“Why do you look so glum? You’re not angry, are you? Wait a bit, you shallsoon get to bed.... What’s the time?”
“It’ll be three o’clock. Past three, it must be.”
“We’ll leave off soon. We’ll leave off.”
“Don’t mention it; it doesn’t matter. Keep it up as long as you like....”
“What’s the matter with him?” Mitya wondered for an instant, and he ranback to the room where the girls were dancing. But she was not there. Shewas not in the blue room either; there was no one but Kalganov asleep onthe sofa. Mitya peeped behind the curtain—she was there. She was sittingin the corner, on a trunk. Bent forward, with her head and arms on the bedclose by, she was crying bitterly, doing her utmost to stifle her sobsthat she might not be heard. Seeing Mitya, she beckoned him to her, andwhen he ran to her, she grasped his hand tightly.
“Mitya, Mitya, I loved him, you know. How I have loved him these fiveyears, all that time! Did I love him or only my own anger? No, him, him!It’s a lie that it was my anger I loved and not him. Mitya, I was onlyseventeen then; he was so kind to me, so merry; he used to sing to me....Or so it seemed to a silly girl like me.... And now, O Lord, it’s not thesame man. Even his face is not the same; he’s different altogether. Ishouldn’t have known him. I drove here with Timofey, and all the way I wasthinking how I should meet him, what I should say to him, how we shouldlook at one another. My soul was faint, and all of a sudden it was just asthough he had emptied a pail of dirty water over me. He talked to me likea schoolmaster, all so grave and learned; he met me so solemnly that I wasstruck dumb. I couldn’t get a word in. At first I thought he was ashamedto talk before his great big Pole. I sat staring at him and wondering whyI couldn’t say a word to him now. It must have been his wife that ruinedhim; you know he threw me up to get married. She must have changed himlike that. Mitya, how shameful it is! Oh, Mitya, I’m ashamed, I’m ashamedfor all my life. Curse it, curse it, curse those five years!”
And again she burst into tears, but clung tight to Mitya’s hand and didnot let it go.
“Mitya, darling, stay, don’t go away. I want to say one word to you,” shewhispered, and suddenly raised her face to him. “Listen, tell me who it isI love? I love one man here. Who is that man? That’s what you must tellme.”
A smile lighted up her face that was swollen with weeping, and her eyesshone in the half darkness.
“A falcon flew in, and my heart sank. ‘Fool! that’s the man you love!’That was what my heart whispered to me at once. You came in and all grewbright. What’s he afraid of? I wondered. For you were frightened; youcouldn’t speak. It’s not them he’s afraid of—could you be frightened ofany one? It’s me he’s afraid of, I thought, only me. So Fenya told you,you little stupid, how I called to Alyosha out of the window that I’dloved Mityenka for one hour, and that I was going now to love ... another.Mitya, Mitya, how could I be such a fool as to think I could love any oneafter you? Do you forgive me, Mitya? Do you forgive me or not? Do you loveme? Do you love me?” She jumped up and held him with both hands on hisshoulders. Mitya, dumb with rapture, gazed into her eyes, at her face, ather smile, and suddenly clasped her tightly in his arms and kissed herpassionately.
“You will forgive me for having tormented you? It was through spite Itormented you all. It was for spite I drove the old man out of hismind.... Do you remember how you drank at my house one day and broke thewine‐glass? I remembered that and I broke a glass to‐day and drank ‘to myvile heart.’ Mitya, my falcon, why don’t you kiss me? He kissed me once,and now he draws back and looks and listens. Why listen to me? Kiss me,kiss me hard, that’s right. If you love, well, then, love! I’ll be yourslave now, your slave for the rest of my life. It’s sweet to be a slave.Kiss me! Beat me, ill‐treat me, do what you will with me.... And I dodeserve to suffer. Stay, wait, afterwards, I won’t have that....” shesuddenly thrust him away. “Go along, Mitya, I’ll come and have some wine,I want to be drunk, I’m going to get drunk and dance; I must, I must!” Shetore herself away from him and disappeared behind the curtain. Mityafollowed like a drunken man.
“Yes, come what may—whatever may happen now, for one minute I’d give thewhole world,” he thought. Grushenka did, in fact, toss off a whole glassof champagne at one gulp, and became at once very tipsy. She sat down inthe same chair as before, with a blissful smile on her face. Her cheekswere glowing, her lips were burning, her flashing eyes were moist; therewas passionate appeal in her eyes. Even Kalganov felt a stir at the heartand went up to her.
“Did you feel how I kissed you when you were asleep just now?” she saidthickly. “I’m drunk now, that’s what it is.... And aren’t you drunk? Andwhy isn’t Mitya drinking? Why don’t you drink, Mitya? I’m drunk, and youdon’t drink....”
“I am drunk! I’m drunk as it is ... drunk with you ... and now I’ll bedrunk with wine, too.”
He drank off another glass, and—he thought it strange himself—that glassmade him completely drunk. He was suddenly drunk, although till thatmoment he had been quite sober, he remembered that. From that momenteverything whirled about him, as though he were delirious. He walked,laughed, talked to everybody, without knowing what he was doing. Only onepersistent burning sensation made itself felt continually, “like a red‐hotcoal in his heart,” he said afterwards. He went up to her, sat beside her,gazed at her, listened to her.... She became very talkative, kept callingevery one to her, and beckoned to different girls out of the chorus. Whenthe girl came up, she either kissed her, or made the sign of the crossover her. In another minute she might have cried. She was greatly amusedby the “little old man,” as she called Maximov. He ran up every minute tokiss her hands, “each little finger,” and finally he danced another danceto an old song, which he sang himself. He danced with special vigor to therefrain:

    The little pig says—umph! umph! umph!    The little calf says—moo, moo, moo,    The little duck says—quack, quack, quack,    The little goose says—ga, ga, ga.    The hen goes strutting through the porch;    Troo‐roo‐roo‐roo‐roo, she’ll say,    Troo‐roo‐roo‐roo‐roo, she’ll say!

“Give him something, Mitya,” said Grushenka. “Give him a present, he’spoor, you know. Ah, the poor, the insulted!... Do you know, Mitya, I shallgo into a nunnery. No, I really shall one day, Alyosha said something tome to‐day that I shall remember all my life.... Yes.... But to‐day let usdance. To‐morrow to the nunnery, but to‐day we’ll dance. I want to playto‐day, good people, and what of it? God will forgive us. If I were God,I’d forgive every one: ‘My dear sinners, from this day forth I forgiveyou.’ I’m going to beg forgiveness: ‘Forgive me, good people, a sillywench.’ I’m a beast, that’s what I am. But I want to pray. I gave a littleonion. Wicked as I’ve been, I want to pray. Mitya, let them dance, don’tstop them. Every one in the world is good. Every one—even the worst ofthem. The world’s a nice place. Though we’re bad the world’s all right.We’re good and bad, good and bad.... Come, tell me, I’ve something to askyou: come here every one, and I’ll ask you: Why am I so good? You know Iam good. I’m very good.... Come, why am I so good?”
So Grushenka babbled on, getting more and more drunk. At last sheannounced that she was going to dance, too. She got up from her chair,staggering. “Mitya, don’t give me any more wine—if I ask you, don’t giveit to me. Wine doesn’t give peace. Everything’s going round, the stove,and everything. I want to dance. Let every one see how I dance ... letthem see how beautifully I dance....”
She really meant it. She pulled a white cambric handkerchief out of herpocket, and took it by one corner in her right hand, to wave it in thedance. Mitya ran to and fro, the girls were quiet, and got ready to breakinto a dancing song at the first signal. Maximov, hearing that Grushenkawanted to dance, squealed with delight, and ran skipping about in front ofher, humming:

    With legs so slim and sides so trim    And its little tail curled tight.

But Grushenka waved her handkerchief at him and drove him away.
“Sh‐h! Mitya, why don’t they come? Let every one come ... to look on. Callthem in, too, that were locked in.... Why did you lock them in? Tell themI’m going to dance. Let them look on, too....”
Mitya walked with a drunken swagger to the locked door, and began knockingto the Poles with his fist.
“Hi, you ... Podvysotskys! Come, she’s going to dance. She calls you.”
“_Lajdak!_” one of the Poles shouted in reply.
“You’re a _lajdak_ yourself! You’re a little scoundrel, that’s what youare.”
“Leave off laughing at Poland,” said Kalganov sententiously. He too wasdrunk.
“Be quiet, boy! If I call him a scoundrel, it doesn’t mean that I calledall Poland so. One _lajdak_ doesn’t make a Poland. Be quiet, my prettyboy, eat a sweetmeat.”
“Ach, what fellows! As though they were not men. Why won’t they makefriends?” said Grushenka, and went forward to dance. The chorus broke into“Ah, my porch, my new porch!” Grushenka flung back her head, half openedher lips, smiled, waved her handkerchief, and suddenly, with a violentlurch, stood still in the middle of the room, looking bewildered.
“I’m weak....” she said in an exhausted voice. “Forgive me.... I’m weak, Ican’t.... I’m sorry.”
She bowed to the chorus, and then began bowing in all directions.
“I’m sorry.... Forgive me....”
“The lady’s been drinking. The pretty lady has been drinking,” voices wereheard saying.
“The lady’s drunk too much,” Maximov explained to the girls, giggling.
“Mitya, lead me away ... take me,” said Grushenka helplessly. Mityapounced on her, snatched her up in his arms, and carried the preciousburden through the curtains.
“Well, now I’ll go,” thought Kalganov, and walking out of the blue room,he closed the two halves of the door after him. But the orgy in the largerroom went on and grew louder and louder. Mitya laid Grushenka on the bedand kissed her on the lips.
“Don’t touch me....” she faltered, in an imploring voice. “Don’t touch me,till I’m yours.... I’ve told you I’m yours, but don’t touch me ... spareme.... With them here, with them close, you mustn’t. He’s here. It’s nastyhere....”
“I’ll obey you! I won’t think of it ... I worship you!” muttered Mitya.“Yes, it’s nasty here, it’s abominable.”
And still holding her in his arms, he sank on his knees by the bedside.
“I know, though you’re a brute, you’re generous,” Grushenka articulatedwith difficulty. “It must be honorable ... it shall be honorable for thefuture ... and let us be honest, let us be good, not brutes, but good ...take me away, take me far away, do you hear? I don’t want it to be here,but far, far away....”
“Oh, yes, yes, it must be!” said Mitya, pressing her in his arms. “I’lltake you and we’ll fly away.... Oh, I’d give my whole life for one yearonly to know about that blood!”
“What blood?” asked Grushenka, bewildered.
“Nothing,” muttered Mitya, through his teeth. “Grusha, you wanted to behonest, but I’m a thief. But I’ve stolen money from Katya.... Disgrace, adisgrace!”
“From Katya, from that young lady? No, you didn’t steal it. Give it herback, take it from me.... Why make a fuss? Now everything of mine isyours. What does money matter? We shall waste it anyway.... Folks like usare bound to waste money. But we’d better go and work the land. I want todig the earth with my own hands. We must work, do you hear? Alyosha saidso. I won’t be your mistress, I’ll be faithful to you, I’ll be your slave,I’ll work for you. We’ll go to the young lady and bow down to hertogether, so that she may forgive us, and then we’ll go away. And if shewon’t forgive us, we’ll go, anyway. Take her her money and love me....Don’t love her.... Don’t love her any more. If you love her, I shallstrangle her.... I’ll put out both her eyes with a needle....”
“I love you. I love only you. I’ll love you in Siberia....”
“Why Siberia? Never mind, Siberia, if you like. I don’t care ... we’llwork ... there’s snow in Siberia.... I love driving in the snow ... andmust have bells.... Do you hear, there’s a bell ringing? Where is thatbell ringing? There are people coming.... Now it’s stopped.”
She closed her eyes, exhausted, and suddenly fell asleep for an instant.There had certainly been the sound of a bell in the distance, but theringing had ceased. Mitya let his head sink on her breast. He did notnotice that the bell had ceased ringing, nor did he notice that the songshad ceased, and that instead of singing and drunken clamor there wasabsolute stillness in the house. Grushenka opened her eyes.
“What’s the matter? Was I asleep? Yes ... a bell ... I’ve been asleep anddreamt I was driving over the snow with bells, and I dozed. I was withsome one I loved, with you. And far, far away. I was holding you andkissing you, nestling close to you. I was cold, and the snow glistened....You know how the snow glistens at night when the moon shines. It was asthough I was not on earth. I woke up, and my dear one is close to me. Howsweet that is!...”
“Close to you,” murmured Mitya, kissing her dress, her bosom, her hands.And suddenly he had a strange fancy: it seemed to him that she was lookingstraight before her, not at him, not into his face, but over his head,with an intent, almost uncanny fixity. An expression of wonder, almost ofalarm, came suddenly into her face.
“Mitya, who is that looking at us?” she whispered.
Mitya turned, and saw that some one had, in fact, parted the curtains andseemed to be watching them. And not one person alone, it seemed.
He jumped up and walked quickly to the intruder.
“Here, come to us, come here,” said a voice, speaking not loudly, butfirmly and peremptorily.
Mitya passed to the other side of the curtain and stood stock still. Theroom was filled with people, but not those who had been there before. Aninstantaneous shiver ran down his back, and he shuddered. He recognizedall those people instantly. That tall, stout old man in the overcoat andforage‐cap with a cockade—was the police captain, Mihail Makarovitch. Andthat “consumptive‐looking” trim dandy, “who always has such polishedboots”—that was the deputy prosecutor. “He has a chronometer worth fourhundred roubles; he showed it to me.” And that small young man inspectacles.... Mitya forgot his surname though he knew him, had seen him:he was the “investigating lawyer,” from the “school of jurisprudence,” whohad only lately come to the town. And this man—the inspector of police,Mavriky Mavrikyevitch, a man he knew well. And those fellows with thebrass plates on, why are they here? And those other two ... peasants....And there at the door Kalganov with Trifon Borissovitch....
“Gentlemen! What’s this for, gentlemen?” began Mitya, but suddenly, asthough beside himself, not knowing what he was doing, he cried aloud, atthe top of his voice:
“I un—der—stand!”
The young man in spectacles moved forward suddenly, and stepping up toMitya, began with dignity, though hurriedly:
“We have to make ... in brief, I beg you to come this way, this way to thesofa.... It is absolutely imperative that you should give an explanation.”
“The old man!” cried Mitya frantically. “The old man and his blood!... Iunderstand.”
And he sank, almost fell, on a chair close by, as though he had been mowndown by a scythe.
“You understand? He understands it! Monster and parricide! Your father’sblood cries out against you!” the old captain of police roared suddenly,stepping up to Mitya.
He was beside himself, crimson in the face and quivering all over.
“This is impossible!” cried the small young man. “Mihail Makarovitch,Mihail Makarovitch, this won’t do!... I beg you’ll allow me to speak. Ishould never have expected such behavior from you....”
“This is delirium, gentlemen, raving delirium,” cried the captain ofpolice; “look at him: drunk, at this time of night, in the company of adisreputable woman, with the blood of his father on his hands.... It’sdelirium!...”
“I beg you most earnestly, dear Mihail Makarovitch, to restrain yourfeelings,” the prosecutor said in a rapid whisper to the old policecaptain, “or I shall be forced to resort to—”
But the little lawyer did not allow him to finish. He turned to Mitya, anddelivered himself in a loud, firm, dignified voice:
“Ex‐Lieutenant Karamazov, it is my duty to inform you that you are chargedwith the murder of your father, Fyodor Pavlovitch Karamazov, perpetratedthis night....”
He said something more, and the prosecutor, too, put in something, butthough Mitya heard them he did not understand them. He stared at them allwith wild eyes.



Book IX. The Preliminary Investigation


Chapter I. The Beginning Of Perhotin’s Official Career

Pyotr Ilyitch Perhotin, whom we left knocking at the strong locked gatesof the widow Morozov’s house, ended, of course, by making himself heard.Fenya, who was still excited by the fright she had had two hours before,and too much “upset” to go to bed, was almost frightened into hysterics onhearing the furious knocking at the gate. Though she had herself seen himdrive away, she fancied that it must be Dmitri Fyodorovitch knockingagain, no one else could knock so savagely. She ran to the house‐porter,who had already waked up and gone out to the gate, and began imploring himnot to open it. But having questioned Pyotr Ilyitch, and learned that hewanted to see Fenya on very “important business,” the man made up his mindat last to open. Pyotr Ilyitch was admitted into Fenya’s kitchen, but thegirl begged him to allow the house‐porter to be present, “because of hermisgivings.” He began questioning her and at once learnt the most vitalfact, that is, that when Dmitri Fyodorovitch had run out to look forGrushenka, he had snatched up a pestle from the mortar, and that when hereturned, the pestle was not with him and his hands were smeared withblood.
“And the blood was simply flowing, dripping from him, dripping!” Fenyakept exclaiming. This horrible detail was simply the product of herdisordered imagination. But although not “dripping,” Pyotr Ilyitch hadhimself seen those hands stained with blood, and had helped to wash them.Moreover, the question he had to decide was not how soon the blood haddried, but where Dmitri Fyodorovitch had run with the pestle, or rather,whether it really was to Fyodor Pavlovitch’s, and how he couldsatisfactorily ascertain. Pyotr Ilyitch persisted in returning to thispoint, and though he found out nothing conclusive, yet he carried away aconviction that Dmitri Fyodorovitch could have gone nowhere but to hisfather’s house, and that therefore something must have happened there.
“And when he came back,” Fenya added with excitement, “I told him thewhole story, and then I began asking him, ‘Why have you got blood on yourhands, Dmitri Fyodorovitch?’ and he answered that that was human blood,and that he had just killed some one. He confessed it all to me, andsuddenly ran off like a madman. I sat down and began thinking, where’s herun off to now like a madman? He’ll go to Mokroe, I thought, and kill mymistress there. I ran out to beg him not to kill her. I was running to hislodgings, but I looked at Plotnikov’s shop, and saw him just setting off,and there was no blood on his hands then.” (Fenya had noticed this andremembered it.) Fenya’s old grandmother confirmed her evidence as far asshe was capable. After asking some further questions, Pyotr Ilyitch leftthe house, even more upset and uneasy than he had been when he entered it.
The most direct and the easiest thing for him to do would have been to gostraight to Fyodor Pavlovitch’s, to find out whether anything had happenedthere, and if so, what; and only to go to the police captain, as PyotrIlyitch firmly intended doing, when he had satisfied himself of the fact.But the night was dark, Fyodor Pavlovitch’s gates were strong, and hewould have to knock again. His acquaintance with Fyodor Pavlovitch was ofthe slightest, and what if, after he had been knocking, they opened tohim, and nothing had happened? Then Fyodor Pavlovitch in his jeering waywould go telling the story all over the town, how a stranger, calledPerhotin, had broken in upon him at midnight to ask if any one had killedhim. It would make a scandal. And scandal was what Pyotr Ilyitch dreadedmore than anything in the world.
Yet the feeling that possessed him was so strong, that though he stampedhis foot angrily and swore at himself, he set off again, not to FyodorPavlovitch’s but to Madame Hohlakov’s. He decided that if she deniedhaving just given Dmitri Fyodorovitch three thousand roubles, he would gostraight to the police captain, but if she admitted having given him themoney, he would go home and let the matter rest till next morning.
It is, of course, perfectly evident that there was even more likelihood ofcausing scandal by going at eleven o’clock at night to a fashionable lady,a complete stranger, and perhaps rousing her from her bed to ask her anamazing question, than by going to Fyodor Pavlovitch. But that is just howit is, sometimes, especially in cases like the present one, with thedecisions of the most precise and phlegmatic people. Pyotr Ilyitch was byno means phlegmatic at that moment. He remembered all his life how ahaunting uneasiness gradually gained possession of him, growing more andmore painful and driving him on, against his will. Yet he kept cursinghimself, of course, all the way for going to this lady, but “I will get tothe bottom of it, I will!” he repeated for the tenth time, grinding histeeth, and he carried out his intention.
It was exactly eleven o’clock when he entered Madame Hohlakov’s house. Hewas admitted into the yard pretty quickly, but, in response to his inquirywhether the lady was still up, the porter could give no answer, exceptthat she was usually in bed by that time.
“Ask at the top of the stairs. If the lady wants to receive you, she’llreceive you. If she won’t, she won’t.”
Pyotr Ilyitch went up, but did not find things so easy here. The footmanwas unwilling to take in his name, but finally called a maid. PyotrIlyitch politely but insistently begged her to inform her lady that anofficial, living in the town, called Perhotin, had called on particularbusiness, and that if it were not of the greatest importance he would nothave ventured to come. “Tell her in those words, in those words exactly,”he asked the girl.
She went away. He remained waiting in the entry. Madame Hohlakov herselfwas already in her bedroom, though not yet asleep. She had felt upset eversince Mitya’s visit, and had a presentiment that she would not get throughthe night without the sick headache which always, with her, followed suchexcitement. She was surprised on hearing the announcement from the maid.She irritably declined to see him, however, though the unexpected visit atsuch an hour, of an “official living in the town,” who was a totalstranger, roused her feminine curiosity intensely. But this time PyotrIlyitch was as obstinate as a mule. He begged the maid most earnestly totake another message in these very words:
“That he had come on business of the greatest importance, and that MadameHohlakov might have cause to regret it later, if she refused to see himnow.”
“I plunged headlong,” he described it afterwards.
The maid, gazing at him in amazement, went to take his message again.Madame Hohlakov was impressed. She thought a little, asked what he lookedlike, and learned that he was “very well dressed, young and so polite.” Wemay note, parenthetically, that Pyotr Ilyitch was a rather good‐lookingyoung man, and well aware of the fact. Madame Hohlakov made up her mind tosee him. She was in her dressing‐gown and slippers, but she flung a blackshawl over her shoulders. “The official” was asked to walk into thedrawing‐room, the very room in which Mitya had been received shortlybefore. The lady came to meet her visitor, with a sternly inquiringcountenance, and, without asking him to sit down, began at once with thequestion:
“What do you want?”
“I have ventured to disturb you, madam, on a matter concerning our commonacquaintance, Dmitri Fyodorovitch Karamazov,” Perhotin began.
But he had hardly uttered the name, when the lady’s face showed signs ofacute irritation. She almost shrieked, and interrupted him in a fury:
“How much longer am I to be worried by that awful man?” she criedhysterically. “How dare you, sir, how could you venture to disturb a ladywho is a stranger to you, in her own house at such an hour!... And toforce yourself upon her to talk of a man who came here, to this verydrawing‐room, only three hours ago, to murder me, and went stamping out ofthe room, as no one would go out of a decent house. Let me tell you, sir,that I shall lodge a complaint against you, that I will not let it pass.Kindly leave me at once.... I am a mother.... I ... I—”
“Murder! then he tried to murder you, too?”
“Why, has he killed somebody else?” Madame Hohlakov asked impulsively.
“If you would kindly listen, madam, for half a moment, I’ll explain it allin a couple of words,” answered Perhotin, firmly. “At five o’clock thisafternoon Dmitri Fyodorovitch borrowed ten roubles from me, and I know fora fact he had no money. Yet at nine o’clock, he came to see me with abundle of hundred‐rouble notes in his hand, about two or three thousandroubles. His hands and face were all covered with blood, and he lookedlike a madman. When I asked him where he had got so much money, heanswered that he had just received it from you, that you had given him asum of three thousand to go to the gold‐mines....”
Madame Hohlakov’s face assumed an expression of intense and painfulexcitement.
“Good God! He must have killed his old father!” she cried, clasping herhands. “I have never given him money, never! Oh, run, run!... Don’t sayanother word! Save the old man ... run to his father ... run!”
“Excuse me, madam, then you did not give him money? You remember for afact that you did not give him any money?”
“No, I didn’t, I didn’t! I refused to give it him, for he could notappreciate it. He ran out in a fury, stamping. He rushed at me, but Islipped away.... And let me tell you, as I wish to hide nothing from younow, that he positively spat at me. Can you fancy that! But why are westanding? Ah, sit down.”
“Excuse me, I....”
“Or better run, run, you must run and save the poor old man from an awfuldeath!”
“But if he has killed him already?”
“Ah, good heavens, yes! Then what are we to do now? What do you think wemust do now?”
Meantime she had made Pyotr Ilyitch sit down and sat down herself, facinghim. Briefly, but fairly clearly, Pyotr Ilyitch told her the history ofthe affair, that part of it at least which he had himself witnessed. Hedescribed, too, his visit to Fenya, and told her about the pestle. Allthese details produced an overwhelming effect on the distracted lady, whokept uttering shrieks, and covering her face with her hands....
“Would you believe it, I foresaw all this! I have that special faculty,whatever I imagine comes to pass. And how often I’ve looked at that awfulman and always thought, that man will end by murdering me. And now it’shappened ... that is, if he hasn’t murdered me, but only his own father,it’s only because the finger of God preserved me, and what’s more, he wasashamed to murder me because, in this very place, I put the holy ikon fromthe relics of the holy martyr, Saint Varvara, on his neck.... And to thinkhow near I was to death at that minute, I went close up to him and hestretched out his neck to me!... Do you know, Pyotr Ilyitch (I think yousaid your name was Pyotr Ilyitch), I don’t believe in miracles, but thatikon and this unmistakable miracle with me now—that shakes me, and I’mready to believe in anything you like. Have you heard about FatherZossima?... But I don’t know what I’m saying ... and only fancy, with theikon on his neck he spat at me.... He only spat, it’s true, he didn’tmurder me and ... he dashed away! But what shall we do, what must we donow? What do you think?”
Pyotr Ilyitch got up, and announced that he was going straight to thepolice captain, to tell him all about it, and leave him to do what hethought fit.
“Oh, he’s an excellent man, excellent! Mihail Makarovitch, I know him. Ofcourse, he’s the person to go to. How practical you are, Pyotr Ilyitch!How well you’ve thought of everything! I should never have thought of itin your place!”
“Especially as I know the police captain very well, too,” observed PyotrIlyitch, who still continued to stand, and was obviously anxious to escapeas quickly as possible from the impulsive lady, who would not let him saygood‐by and go away.
“And be sure, be sure,” she prattled on, “to come back and tell me whatyou see there, and what you find out ... what comes to light ... howthey’ll try him ... and what he’s condemned to.... Tell me, we have nocapital punishment, have we? But be sure to come, even if it’s at threeo’clock at night, at four, at half‐past four.... Tell them to wake me, towake me, to shake me, if I don’t get up.... But, good heavens, I shan’tsleep! But wait, hadn’t I better come with you?”
“N—no. But if you would write three lines with your own hand, stating thatyou did not give Dmitri Fyodorovitch money, it might, perhaps, be of use... in case it’s needed....”
“To be sure!” Madame Hohlakov skipped, delighted, to her bureau. “And youknow I’m simply struck, amazed at your resourcefulness, your good sense insuch affairs. Are you in the service here? I’m delighted to think thatyou’re in the service here!”
And still speaking, she scribbled on half a sheet of notepaper thefollowing lines:

    I’ve never in my life lent to that unhappy man, Dmitri    Fyodorovitch Karamazov (for, in spite of all, he is unhappy),    three thousand roubles to‐day. I’ve never given him money, never:    That I swear by all that’s holy!
    K. HOHLAKOV.

“Here’s the note!” she turned quickly to Pyotr Ilyitch. “Go, save him.It’s a noble deed on your part!”
And she made the sign of the cross three times over him. She ran out toaccompany him to the passage.
“How grateful I am to you! You can’t think how grateful I am to you forhaving come to me, first. How is it I haven’t met you before? I shall feelflattered at seeing you at my house in the future. How delightful it isthat you are living here!... Such precision! Such practical ability!...They must appreciate you, they must understand you. If there’s anything Ican do, believe me ... oh, I love young people! I’m in love with youngpeople! The younger generation are the one prop of our suffering country.Her one hope.... Oh, go, go!...”
But Pyotr Ilyitch had already run away or she would not have let him go sosoon. Yet Madame Hohlakov had made a rather agreeable impression on him,which had somewhat softened his anxiety at being drawn into such anunpleasant affair. Tastes differ, as we all know. “She’s by no means soelderly,” he thought, feeling pleased, “on the contrary I should havetaken her for her daughter.”
As for Madame Hohlakov, she was simply enchanted by the young man. “Suchsense! such exactness! in so young a man! in our day! and all that withsuch manners and appearance! People say the young people of to‐day are nogood for anything, but here’s an example!” etc. So she simply forgot this“dreadful affair,” and it was only as she was getting into bed, that,suddenly recalling “how near death she had been,” she exclaimed: “Ah, itis awful, awful!”
But she fell at once into a sound, sweet sleep.
I would not, however, have dwelt on such trivial and irrelevant details,if this eccentric meeting of the young official with the by no meanselderly widow had not subsequently turned out to be the foundation of thewhole career of that practical and precise young man. His story isremembered to this day with amazement in our town, and I shall perhapshave something to say about it, when I have finished my long history ofthe Brothers Karamazov.


Chapter II. The Alarm

Our police captain, Mihail Makarovitch Makarov, a retired lieutenant‐colonel, was a widower and an excellent man. He had only come to us threeyears previously, but had won general esteem, chiefly because he “knew howto keep society together.” He was never without visitors, and could nothave got on without them. Some one or other was always dining with him; henever sat down to table without guests. He gave regular dinners, too, onall sorts of occasions, sometimes most surprising ones. Though the farewas not _recherché_, it was abundant. The fish‐pies were excellent, andthe wine made up in quantity for what it lacked in quality.
The first room his guests entered was a well‐fitted billiard‐room, withpictures of English race‐horses, in black frames on the walls, anessential decoration, as we all know, for a bachelor’s billiard‐room.There was card‐playing every evening at his house, if only at one table.But at frequent intervals, all the society of our town, with the mammasand young ladies, assembled at his house to dance. Though MihailMakarovitch was a widower, he did not live alone. His widowed daughterlived with him, with her two unmarried daughters, grown‐up girls, who hadfinished their education. They were of agreeable appearance and livelycharacter, and though every one knew they would have no dowry, theyattracted all the young men of fashion to their grandfather’s house.
Mihail Makarovitch was by no means very efficient in his work, though heperformed his duties no worse than many others. To speak plainly, he was aman of rather narrow education. His understanding of the limits of hisadministrative power could not always be relied upon. It was not so muchthat he failed to grasp certain reforms enacted during the present reign,as that he made conspicuous blunders in his interpretation of them. Thiswas not from any special lack of intelligence, but from carelessness, forhe was always in too great a hurry to go into the subject.
“I have the heart of a soldier rather than of a civilian,” he used to sayof himself. He had not even formed a definite idea of the fundamentalprinciples of the reforms connected with the emancipation of the serfs,and only picked it up, so to speak, from year to year, involuntarilyincreasing his knowledge by practice. And yet he was himself a landowner.Pyotr Ilyitch knew for certain that he would meet some of MihailMakarovitch’s visitors there that evening, but he didn’t know which. As ithappened, at that moment the prosecutor, and Varvinsky, our districtdoctor, a young man, who had only just come to us from Petersburg aftertaking a brilliant degree at the Academy of Medicine, were playing whistat the police captain’s. Ippolit Kirillovitch, the prosecutor (he wasreally the deputy prosecutor, but we always called him the prosecutor),was rather a peculiar man, of about five and thirty, inclined to beconsumptive, and married to a fat and childless woman. He was vain andirritable, though he had a good intellect, and even a kind heart. Itseemed that all that was wrong with him was that he had a better opinionof himself than his ability warranted. And that made him seem constantlyuneasy. He had, moreover, certain higher, even artistic, leanings, towardspsychology, for instance, a special study of the human heart, a specialknowledge of the criminal and his crime. He cherished a grievance on thisground, considering that he had been passed over in the service, and beingfirmly persuaded that in higher spheres he had not been properlyappreciated, and had enemies. In gloomy moments he even threatened to giveup his post, and practice as a barrister in criminal cases. The unexpectedKaramazov case agitated him profoundly: “It was a case that might well betalked about all over Russia.” But I am anticipating.
Nikolay Parfenovitch Nelyudov, the young investigating lawyer, who hadonly come from Petersburg two months before, was sitting in the next roomwith the young ladies. People talked about it afterwards and wondered thatall the gentlemen should, as though intentionally, on the evening of “thecrime” have been gathered together at the house of the executiveauthority. Yet it was perfectly simple and happened quite naturally.
Ippolit Kirillovitch’s wife had had toothache for the last two days, andhe was obliged to go out to escape from her groans. The doctor, from thevery nature of his being, could not spend an evening except at cards.Nikolay Parfenovitch Nelyudov had been intending for three days past todrop in that evening at Mihail Makarovitch’s, so to speak casually, so asslyly to startle the eldest granddaughter, Olga Mihailovna, by showingthat he knew her secret, that he knew it was her birthday, and that shewas trying to conceal it on purpose, so as not to be obliged to give adance. He anticipated a great deal of merriment, many playful jests abouther age, and her being afraid to reveal it, about his knowing her secretand telling everybody, and so on. The charming young man was a great adeptat such teasing; the ladies had christened him “the naughty man,” and heseemed to be delighted at the name. He was extremely well‐bred, however,of good family, education and feelings, and, though leading a life ofpleasure, his sallies were always innocent and in good taste. He wasshort, and delicate‐looking. On his white, slender, little fingers healways wore a number of big, glittering rings. When he was engaged in hisofficial duties, he always became extraordinarily grave, as thoughrealizing his position and the sanctity of the obligations laid upon him.He had a special gift for mystifying murderers and other criminals of thepeasant class during interrogation, and if he did not win their respect,he certainly succeeded in arousing their wonder.
Pyotr Ilyitch was simply dumbfounded when he went into the policecaptain’s. He saw instantly that every one knew. They had positivelythrown down their cards, all were standing up and talking. Even NikolayParfenovitch had left the young ladies and run in, looking strenuous andready for action. Pyotr Ilyitch was met with the astounding news that oldFyodor Pavlovitch really had been murdered that evening in his own house,murdered and robbed. The news had only just reached them in the followingmanner.
Marfa Ignatyevna, the wife of old Grigory, who had been knocked senselessnear the fence, was sleeping soundly in her bed and might well have slepttill morning after the draught she had taken. But, all of a sudden shewaked up, no doubt roused by a fearful epileptic scream from Smerdyakov,who was lying in the next room unconscious. That scream always precededhis fits, and always terrified and upset Marfa Ignatyevna. She could neverget accustomed to it. She jumped up and ran half‐awake to Smerdyakov’sroom. But it was dark there, and she could only hear the invalid beginningto gasp and struggle. Then Marfa Ignatyevna herself screamed out and wasgoing to call her husband, but suddenly realized that when she had got up,he was not beside her in bed. She ran back to the bedstead and begangroping with her hands, but the bed was really empty. Then he must havegone out—where? She ran to the steps and timidly called him. She got noanswer, of course, but she caught the sound of groans far away in thegarden in the darkness. She listened. The groans were repeated, and it wasevident they came from the garden.
“Good Lord! Just as it was with Lizaveta Smerdyastchaya!” she thoughtdistractedly. She went timidly down the steps and saw that the gate intothe garden was open.
“He must be out there, poor dear,” she thought. She went up to the gateand all at once she distinctly heard Grigory calling her by name, “Marfa!Marfa!” in a weak, moaning, dreadful voice.
“Lord, preserve us from harm!” Marfa Ignatyevna murmured, and ran towardsthe voice, and that was how she found Grigory. But she found him not bythe fence where he had been knocked down, but about twenty paces off. Itappeared later, that he had crawled away on coming to himself, andprobably had been a long time getting so far, losing consciousness severaltimes. She noticed at once that he was covered with blood, and screamed atthe top of her voice. Grigory was muttering incoherently:
“He has murdered ... his father murdered.... Why scream, silly ... run ...fetch some one....”
But Marfa continued screaming, and seeing that her master’s window wasopen and that there was a candle alight in the window, she ran there andbegan calling Fyodor Pavlovitch. But peeping in at the window, she saw afearful sight. Her master was lying on his back, motionless, on the floor.His light‐colored dressing‐gown and white shirt were soaked with blood.The candle on the table brightly lighted up the blood and the motionlessdead face of Fyodor Pavlovitch. Terror‐stricken, Marfa rushed away fromthe window, ran out of the garden, drew the bolt of the big gate and ranheadlong by the back way to the neighbor, Marya Kondratyevna. Both motherand daughter were asleep, but they waked up at Marfa’s desperate andpersistent screaming and knocking at the shutter. Marfa, shrieking andscreaming incoherently, managed to tell them the main fact, and to beg forassistance. It happened that Foma had come back from his wanderings andwas staying the night with them. They got him up immediately and all threeran to the scene of the crime. On the way, Marya Kondratyevna rememberedthat at about eight o’clock she heard a dreadful scream from their garden,and this was no doubt Grigory’s scream, “Parricide!” uttered when hecaught hold of Mitya’s leg.
“Some one person screamed out and then was silent,” Marya Kondratyevnaexplained as she ran. Running to the place where Grigory lay, the twowomen with the help of Foma carried him to the lodge. They lighted acandle and saw that Smerdyakov was no better, that he was writhing inconvulsions, his eyes fixed in a squint, and that foam was flowing fromhis lips. They moistened Grigory’s forehead with water mixed with vinegar,and the water revived him at once. He asked immediately:
“Is the master murdered?”
Then Foma and both the women ran to the house and saw this time that notonly the window, but also the door into the garden was wide open, thoughFyodor Pavlovitch had for the last week locked himself in every night anddid not allow even Grigory to come in on any pretext. Seeing that dooropen, they were afraid to go in to Fyodor Pavlovitch “for fear anythingshould happen afterwards.” And when they returned to Grigory, the old mantold them to go straight to the police captain. Marya Kondratyevna ranthere and gave the alarm to the whole party at the police captain’s. Shearrived only five minutes before Pyotr Ilyitch, so that his story came,not as his own surmise and theory, but as the direct confirmation, by awitness, of the theory held by all, as to the identity of the criminal (atheory he had in the bottom of his heart refused to believe till thatmoment).
It was resolved to act with energy. The deputy police inspector of thetown was commissioned to take four witnesses, to enter Fyodor Pavlovitch’shouse and there to open an inquiry on the spot, according to the regularforms, which I will not go into here. The district doctor, a zealous man,new to his work, almost insisted on accompanying the police captain, theprosecutor, and the investigating lawyer.
I will note briefly that Fyodor Pavlovitch was found to be quite dead,with his skull battered in. But with what? Most likely with the sameweapon with which Grigory had been attacked. And immediately that weaponwas found, Grigory, to whom all possible medical assistance was at oncegiven, described in a weak and breaking voice how he had been knockeddown. They began looking with a lantern by the fence and found the brasspestle dropped in a most conspicuous place on the garden path. There wereno signs of disturbance in the room where Fyodor Pavlovitch was lying. Butby the bed, behind the screen, they picked up from the floor a big andthick envelope with the inscription: “A present of three thousand roublesfor my angel Grushenka, if she is willing to come.” And below had beenadded by Fyodor Pavlovitch, “For my little chicken.” There were threeseals of red sealing‐wax on the envelope, but it had been torn open andwas empty: the money had been removed. They found also on the floor apiece of narrow pink ribbon, with which the envelope had been tied up.
One piece of Pyotr Ilyitch’s evidence made a great impression on theprosecutor and the investigating magistrate, namely, his idea that DmitriFyodorovitch would shoot himself before daybreak, that he had resolved todo so, had spoken of it to Ilyitch, had taken the pistols, loaded thembefore him, written a letter, put it in his pocket, etc. When PyotrIlyitch, though still unwilling to believe in it, threatened to tell someone so as to prevent the suicide, Mitya had answered grinning: “You’ll betoo late.” So they must make haste to Mokroe to find the criminal, beforehe really did shoot himself.
“That’s clear, that’s clear!” repeated the prosecutor in great excitement.“That’s just the way with mad fellows like that: ‘I shall kill myself to‐morrow, so I’ll make merry till I die!’ ”
The story of how he had bought the wine and provisions excited theprosecutor more than ever.
“Do you remember the fellow that murdered a merchant called Olsufyev,gentlemen? He stole fifteen hundred, went at once to have his hair curled,and then, without even hiding the money, carrying it almost in his hand inthe same way, he went off to the girls.”
All were delayed, however, by the inquiry, the search, and theformalities, etc., in the house of Fyodor Pavlovitch. It all took time andso, two hours before starting, they sent on ahead to Mokroe the officer ofthe rural police, Mavriky Mavrikyevitch Schmertsov, who had arrived in thetown the morning before to get his pay. He was instructed to avoid raisingthe alarm when he reached Mokroe, but to keep constant watch over the“criminal” till the arrival of the proper authorities, to procure alsowitnesses for the arrest, police constables, and so on. MavrikyMavrikyevitch did as he was told, preserving his incognito, and giving noone but his old acquaintance, Trifon Borissovitch, the slightest hint ofhis secret business. He had spoken to him just before Mitya met thelandlord in the balcony, looking for him in the dark, and noticed at oncea change in Trifon Borissovitch’s face and voice. So neither Mitya nor anyone else knew that he was being watched. The box with the pistols had beencarried off by Trifon Borissovitch and put in a suitable place. Only afterfour o’clock, almost at sunrise, all the officials, the police captain,the prosecutor, the investigating lawyer, drove up in two carriages, eachdrawn by three horses. The doctor remained at Fyodor Pavlovitch’s to makea post‐mortem next day on the body. But he was particularly interested inthe condition of the servant, Smerdyakov.
“Such violent and protracted epileptic fits, recurring continually fortwenty‐four hours, are rarely to be met with, and are of interest toscience,” he declared enthusiastically to his companions, and as they leftthey laughingly congratulated him on his find. The prosecutor and theinvestigating lawyer distinctly remembered the doctor’s saying thatSmerdyakov could not outlive the night.
After these long, but I think necessary explanations, we will return tothat moment of our tale at which we broke off.


Chapter III. The Sufferings Of A Soul, The First Ordeal

And so Mitya sat looking wildly at the people round him, not understandingwhat was said to him. Suddenly he got up, flung up his hands, and shoutedaloud:
“I’m not guilty! I’m not guilty of that blood! I’m not guilty of myfather’s blood.... I meant to kill him. But I’m not guilty. Not I.”
But he had hardly said this, before Grushenka rushed from behind thecurtain and flung herself at the police captain’s feet.
“It was my fault! Mine! My wickedness!” she cried, in a heartrendingvoice, bathed in tears, stretching out her clasped hands towards them. “Hedid it through me. I tortured him and drove him to it. I tortured thatpoor old man that’s dead, too, in my wickedness, and brought him to this!It’s my fault, mine first, mine most, my fault!”
“Yes, it’s your fault! You’re the chief criminal! You fury! You harlot!You’re the most to blame!” shouted the police captain, threatening herwith his hand. But he was quickly and resolutely suppressed. Theprosecutor positively seized hold of him.
“This is absolutely irregular, Mihail Makarovitch!” he cried. “You arepositively hindering the inquiry.... You’re ruining the case....” healmost gasped.
“Follow the regular course! Follow the regular course!” cried NikolayParfenovitch, fearfully excited too, “otherwise it’s absolutelyimpossible!...”
“Judge us together!” Grushenka cried frantically, still kneeling. “Punishus together. I will go with him now, if it’s to death!”
“Grusha, my life, my blood, my holy one!” Mitya fell on his knees besideher and held her tight in his arms. “Don’t believe her,” he cried, “she’snot guilty of anything, of any blood, of anything!”
He remembered afterwards that he was forcibly dragged away from her byseveral men, and that she was led out, and that when he recovered himselfhe was sitting at the table. Beside him and behind him stood the men withmetal plates. Facing him on the other side of the table sat NikolayParfenovitch, the investigating lawyer. He kept persuading him to drink alittle water out of a glass that stood on the table.
“That will refresh you, that will calm you. Be calm, don’t be frightened,”he added, extremely politely. Mitya (he remembered it afterwards) becamesuddenly intensely interested in his big rings, one with an amethyst, andanother with a transparent bright yellow stone, of great brilliance. Andlong afterwards he remembered with wonder how those rings had riveted hisattention through all those terrible hours of interrogation, so that hewas utterly unable to tear himself away from them and dismiss them, asthings that had nothing to do with his position. On Mitya’s left side, inthe place where Maximov had been sitting at the beginning of the evening,the prosecutor was now seated, and on Mitya’s right hand, where Grushenkahad been, was a rosy‐cheeked young man in a sort of shabby hunting‐jacket,with ink and paper before him. This was the secretary of the investigatinglawyer, who had brought him with him. The police captain was now standingby the window at the other end of the room, beside Kalganov, who wassitting there.
“Drink some water,” said the investigating lawyer softly, for the tenthtime.
“I have drunk it, gentlemen, I have ... but ... come, gentlemen, crush me,punish me, decide my fate!” cried Mitya, staring with terribly fixed wide‐open eyes at the investigating lawyer.
“So you positively declare that you are not guilty of the death of yourfather, Fyodor Pavlovitch?” asked the investigating lawyer, softly butinsistently.
“I am not guilty. I am guilty of the blood of another old man but not ofmy father’s. And I weep for it! I killed, I killed the old man and knockedhim down.... But it’s hard to have to answer for that murder with another,a terrible murder of which I am not guilty.... It’s a terrible accusation,gentlemen, a knock‐down blow. But who has killed my father, who has killedhim? Who can have killed him if I didn’t? It’s marvelous, extraordinary,impossible.”
“Yes, who can have killed him?” the investigating lawyer was beginning,but Ippolit Kirillovitch, the prosecutor, glancing at him, addressedMitya.
“You need not worry yourself about the old servant, Grigory Vassilyevitch.He is alive, he has recovered, and in spite of the terrible blowsinflicted, according to his own and your evidence, by you, there seems nodoubt that he will live, so the doctor says, at least.”
“Alive? He’s alive?” cried Mitya, flinging up his hands. His face beamed.“Lord, I thank Thee for the miracle Thou has wrought for me, a sinner andevildoer. That’s an answer to my prayer. I’ve been praying all night.” Andhe crossed himself three times. He was almost breathless.
“So from this Grigory we have received such important evidence concerningyou, that—” The prosecutor would have continued, but Mitya suddenly jumpedup from his chair.
“One minute, gentlemen, for God’s sake, one minute; I will run to her—”
“Excuse me, at this moment it’s quite impossible,” Nikolay Parfenovitchalmost shrieked. He, too, leapt to his feet. Mitya was seized by the menwith the metal plates, but he sat down of his own accord....
“Gentlemen, what a pity! I wanted to see her for one minute only; I wantedto tell her that it has been washed away, it has gone, that blood that wasweighing on my heart all night, and that I am not a murderer now!Gentlemen, she is my betrothed!” he said ecstatically and reverently,looking round at them all. “Oh, thank you, gentlemen! Oh, in one minuteyou have given me new life, new heart!... That old man used to carry me inhis arms, gentlemen. He used to wash me in the tub when I was a baby threeyears old, abandoned by every one, he was like a father to me!...”
“And so you—” the investigating lawyer began.
“Allow me, gentlemen, allow me one minute more,” interposed Mitya, puttinghis elbows on the table and covering his face with his hands. “Let me havea moment to think, let me breathe, gentlemen. All this is horriblyupsetting, horribly. A man is not a drum, gentlemen!”
“Drink a little more water,” murmured Nikolay Parfenovitch.
Mitya took his hands from his face and laughed. His eyes were confident.He seemed completely transformed in a moment. His whole bearing waschanged; he was once more the equal of these men, with all of whom he wasacquainted, as though they had all met the day before, when nothing hadhappened, at some social gathering. We may note in passing that, on hisfirst arrival, Mitya had been made very welcome at the police captain’s,but later, during the last month especially, Mitya had hardly called atall, and when the police captain met him, in the street, for instance,Mitya noticed that he frowned and only bowed out of politeness. Hisacquaintance with the prosecutor was less intimate, though he sometimespaid his wife, a nervous and fanciful lady, visits of politeness, withoutquite knowing why, and she always received him graciously and had, forsome reason, taken an interest in him up to the last. He had not had timeto get to know the investigating lawyer, though he had met him and talkedto him twice, each time about the fair sex.
“You’re a most skillful lawyer, I see, Nikolay Parfenovitch,” cried Mitya,laughing gayly, “but I can help you now. Oh, gentlemen, I feel like a newman, and don’t be offended at my addressing you so simply and directly.I’m rather drunk, too, I’ll tell you that frankly. I believe I’ve had thehonor and pleasure of meeting you, Nikolay Parfenovitch, at my kinsmanMiüsov’s. Gentlemen, gentlemen, I don’t pretend to be on equal terms withyou. I understand, of course, in what character I am sitting before you.Oh, of course, there’s a horrible suspicion ... hanging over me ... ifGrigory has given evidence.... A horrible suspicion! It’s awful, awful, Iunderstand that! But to business, gentlemen, I am ready, and we will makean end of it in one moment; for, listen, listen, gentlemen! Since I knowI’m innocent, we can put an end to it in a minute. Can’t we? Can’t we?”
Mitya spoke much and quickly, nervously and effusively, as though hepositively took his listeners to be his best friends.
“So, for the present, we will write that you absolutely deny the chargebrought against you,” said Nikolay Parfenovitch, impressively, and bendingdown to the secretary he dictated to him in an undertone what to write.
“Write it down? You want to write that down? Well, write it; I consent, Igive my full consent, gentlemen, only ... do you see?... Stay, stay, writethis. Of disorderly conduct I am guilty, of violence on a poor old man Iam guilty. And there is something else at the bottom of my heart, of whichI am guilty, too—but that you need not write down” (he turned suddenly tothe secretary); “that’s my personal life, gentlemen, that doesn’t concernyou, the bottom of my heart, that’s to say.... But of the murder of my oldfather I’m not guilty. That’s a wild idea. It’s quite a wild idea!... Iwill prove you that and you’ll be convinced directly.... You will laugh,gentlemen. You’ll laugh yourselves at your suspicion!...”
“Be calm, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,” said the investigating lawyer evidentlytrying to allay Mitya’s excitement by his own composure. “Before we go onwith our inquiry, I should like, if you will consent to answer, to hearyou confirm the statement that you disliked your father, FyodorPavlovitch, that you were involved in continual disputes with him. Here atleast, a quarter of an hour ago, you exclaimed that you wanted to killhim: ‘I didn’t kill him,’ you said, ‘but I wanted to kill him.’ ”
“Did I exclaim that? Ach, that may be so, gentlemen! Yes, unhappily, I didwant to kill him ... many times I wanted to ... unhappily, unhappily!”
“You wanted to. Would you consent to explain what motives precisely ledyou to such a sentiment of hatred for your parent?”
“What is there to explain, gentlemen?” Mitya shrugged his shoulderssullenly, looking down. “I have never concealed my feelings. All the townknows about it—every one knows in the tavern. Only lately I declared themin Father Zossima’s cell.... And the very same day, in the evening I beatmy father. I nearly killed him, and I swore I’d come again and kill him,before witnesses.... Oh, a thousand witnesses! I’ve been shouting it aloudfor the last month, any one can tell you that!... The fact stares you inthe face, it speaks for itself, it cries aloud, but feelings, gentlemen,feelings are another matter. You see, gentlemen”—Mitya frowned—“it seemsto me that about feelings you’ve no right to question me. I know that youare bound by your office, I quite understand that, but that’s my affair,my private, intimate affair, yet ... since I haven’t concealed my feelingsin the past ... in the tavern, for instance, I’ve talked to every one, so... so I won’t make a secret of it now. You see, I understand, gentlemen,that there are terrible facts against me in this business. I told everyone that I’d kill him, and now, all of a sudden, he’s been killed. So itmust have been me! Ha ha! I can make allowances for you, gentlemen, I canquite make allowances. I’m struck all of a heap myself, for who can havemurdered him, if not I? That’s what it comes to, isn’t it? If not I, whocan it be, who? Gentlemen, I want to know, I insist on knowing!” heexclaimed suddenly. “Where was he murdered? How was he murdered? How, andwith what? Tell me,” he asked quickly, looking at the two lawyers.
“We found him in his study, lying on his back on the floor, with his headbattered in,” said the prosecutor.
“That’s horrible!” Mitya shuddered and, putting his elbows on the table,hid his face in his right hand.
“We will continue,” interposed Nikolay Parfenovitch. “So what was it thatimpelled you to this sentiment of hatred? You have asserted in public, Ibelieve, that it was based upon jealousy?”
“Well, yes, jealousy. And not only jealousy.”
“Disputes about money?”
“Yes, about money, too.”
“There was a dispute about three thousand roubles, I think, which youclaimed as part of your inheritance?”
“Three thousand! More, more,” cried Mitya hotly; “more than six thousand,more than ten, perhaps. I told every one so, shouted it at them. But Imade up my mind to let it go at three thousand. I was desperately in needof that three thousand ... so the bundle of notes for three thousand thatI knew he kept under his pillow, ready for Grushenka, I considered assimply stolen from me. Yes, gentlemen, I looked upon it as mine, as my ownproperty....”
The prosecutor looked significantly at the investigating lawyer, and hadtime to wink at him on the sly.
“We will return to that subject later,” said the lawyer promptly. “Youwill allow us to note that point and write it down; that you looked uponthat money as your own property?”
“Write it down, by all means. I know that’s another fact that tellsagainst me, but I’m not afraid of facts and I tell them against myself. Doyou hear? Do you know, gentlemen, you take me for a different sort of manfrom what I am,” he added, suddenly gloomy and dejected. “You have to dealwith a man of honor, a man of the highest honor; above all—don’t losesight of it—a man who’s done a lot of nasty things, but has always been,and still is, honorable at bottom, in his inner being. I don’t know how toexpress it. That’s just what’s made me wretched all my life, that Iyearned to be honorable, that I was, so to say, a martyr to a sense ofhonor, seeking for it with a lantern, with the lantern of Diogenes, andyet all my life I’ve been doing filthy things like all of us, gentlemen... that is like me alone. That was a mistake, like me alone, me alone!...Gentlemen, my head aches ...” His brows contracted with pain. “You see,gentlemen, I couldn’t bear the look of him, there was something in himignoble, impudent, trampling on everything sacred, something sneering andirreverent, loathsome, loathsome. But now that he’s dead, I feeldifferently.”
“How do you mean?”
“I don’t feel differently, but I wish I hadn’t hated him so.”
“You feel penitent?”
“No, not penitent, don’t write that. I’m not much good myself, I’m notvery beautiful, so I had no right to consider him repulsive. That’s what Imean. Write that down, if you like.”
Saying this Mitya became very mournful. He had grown more and more gloomyas the inquiry continued.
At that moment another unexpected scene followed. Though Grushenka hadbeen removed, she had not been taken far away, only into the room next butone from the blue room, in which the examination was proceeding. It was alittle room with one window, next beyond the large room in which they haddanced and feasted so lavishly. She was sitting there with no one by herbut Maximov, who was terribly depressed, terribly scared, and clung to herside, as though for security. At their door stood one of the peasants witha metal plate on his breast. Grushenka was crying, and suddenly her griefwas too much for her, she jumped up, flung up her arms and, with a loudwail of sorrow, rushed out of the room to him, to her Mitya, and sounexpectedly that they had not time to stop her. Mitya, hearing her cry,trembled, jumped up, and with a yell rushed impetuously to meet her, notknowing what he was doing. But they were not allowed to come together,though they saw one another. He was seized by the arms. He struggled, andtried to tear himself away. It took three or four men to hold him. She wasseized too, and he saw her stretching out her arms to him, crying aloud asthey carried her away. When the scene was over, he came to himself again,sitting in the same place as before, opposite the investigating lawyer,and crying out to them:
“What do you want with her? Why do you torment her? She’s done nothing,nothing!...”
The lawyers tried to soothe him. About ten minutes passed like this. Atlast Mihail Makarovitch, who had been absent, came hurriedly into theroom, and said in a loud and excited voice to the prosecutor:
“She’s been removed, she’s downstairs. Will you allow me to say one wordto this unhappy man, gentlemen? In your presence, gentlemen, in yourpresence.”
“By all means, Mihail Makarovitch,” answered the investigating lawyer. “Inthe present case we have nothing against it.”
“Listen, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, my dear fellow,” began the police captain,and there was a look of warm, almost fatherly, feeling for the lucklessprisoner on his excited face. “I took your Agrafena Alexandrovnadownstairs myself, and confided her to the care of the landlord’sdaughters, and that old fellow Maximov is with her all the time. And Isoothed her, do you hear? I soothed and calmed her. I impressed on herthat you have to clear yourself, so she mustn’t hinder you, must notdepress you, or you may lose your head and say the wrong thing in yourevidence. In fact, I talked to her and she understood. She’s a sensiblegirl, my boy, a good‐hearted girl, she would have kissed my old hands,begging help for you. She sent me herself, to tell you not to worry abouther. And I must go, my dear fellow, I must go and tell her that you arecalm and comforted about her. And so you must be calm, do you understand?I was unfair to her; she is a Christian soul, gentlemen, yes, I tell you,she’s a gentle soul, and not to blame for anything. So what am I to tellher, Dmitri Fyodorovitch? Will you sit quiet or not?”
The good‐natured police captain said a great deal that was irregular, butGrushenka’s suffering, a fellow creature’s suffering, touched his good‐natured heart, and tears stood in his eyes. Mitya jumped up and rushedtowards him.
“Forgive me, gentlemen, oh, allow me, allow me!” he cried. “You’ve theheart of an angel, an angel, Mihail Makarovitch, I thank you for her. Iwill, I will be calm, cheerful, in fact. Tell her, in the kindness of yourheart, that I am cheerful, quite cheerful, that I shall be laughing in aminute, knowing that she has a guardian angel like you. I shall have donewith all this directly, and as soon as I’m free, I’ll be with her, she’llsee, let her wait. Gentlemen,” he said, turning to the two lawyers, “nowI’ll open my whole soul to you; I’ll pour out everything. We’ll finishthis off directly, finish it off gayly. We shall laugh at it in the end,shan’t we? But, gentlemen, that woman is the queen of my heart. Oh, let metell you that. That one thing I’ll tell you now.... I see I’m withhonorable men. She is my light, she is my holy one, and if only you knew!Did you hear her cry, ‘I’ll go to death with you’? And what have I, apenniless beggar, done for her? Why such love for me? How can a clumsy,ugly brute like me, with my ugly face, deserve such love, that she isready to go to exile with me? And how she fell down at your feet for mysake, just now!... and yet she’s proud and has done nothing! How can Ihelp adoring her, how can I help crying out and rushing to her as I didjust now? Gentlemen, forgive me! But now, now I am comforted.”
And he sank back in his chair and, covering his face with his hands, burstinto tears. But they were happy tears. He recovered himself instantly. Theold police captain seemed much pleased, and the lawyers also. They feltthat the examination was passing into a new phase. When the police captainwent out, Mitya was positively gay.
“Now, gentlemen, I am at your disposal, entirely at your disposal. And ifit were not for all these trivial details, we should understand oneanother in a minute. I’m at those details again. I’m at your disposal,gentlemen, but I declare that we must have mutual confidence, you in meand I in you, or there’ll be no end to it. I speak in your interests. Tobusiness, gentlemen, to business, and don’t rummage in my soul; don’ttease me with trifles, but only ask me about facts and what matters, and Iwill satisfy you at once. And damn the details!”
So spoke Mitya. The interrogation began again.


Chapter IV. The Second Ordeal

“You don’t know how you encourage us, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, by yourreadiness to answer,” said Nikolay Parfenovitch, with an animated air, andobvious satisfaction beaming in his very prominent, short‐sighted, lightgray eyes, from which he had removed his spectacles a moment before. “Andyou have made a very just remark about the mutual confidence, withoutwhich it is sometimes positively impossible to get on in cases of suchimportance, if the suspected party really hopes and desires to defendhimself and is in a position to do so. We, on our side, will do everythingin our power, and you can see for yourself how we are conducting the case.You approve, Ippolit Kirillovitch?” He turned to the prosecutor.
“Oh, undoubtedly,” replied the prosecutor. His tone was somewhat cold,compared with Nikolay Parfenovitch’s impulsiveness.
I will note once for all that Nikolay Parfenovitch, who had but latelyarrived among us, had from the first felt marked respect for IppolitKirillovitch, our prosecutor, and had become almost his bosom friend. Hewas almost the only person who put implicit faith in IppolitKirillovitch’s extraordinary talents as a psychologist and orator and inthe justice of his grievance. He had heard of him in Petersburg. On theother hand, young Nikolay Parfenovitch was the only person in the wholeworld whom our “unappreciated” prosecutor genuinely liked. On their way toMokroe they had time to come to an understanding about the present case.And now as they sat at the table, the sharp‐witted junior caught andinterpreted every indication on his senior colleague’s face—half a word, aglance, or a wink.
“Gentlemen, only let me tell my own story and don’t interrupt me withtrivial questions and I’ll tell you everything in a moment,” said Mityaexcitedly.
“Excellent! Thank you. But before we proceed to listen to yourcommunication, will you allow me to inquire as to another little fact ofgreat interest to us? I mean the ten roubles you borrowed yesterday atabout five o’clock on the security of your pistols, from your friend,Pyotr Ilyitch Perhotin.”
“I pledged them, gentlemen. I pledged them for ten roubles. What more?That’s all about it. As soon as I got back to town I pledged them.”
“You got back to town? Then you had been out of town?”
“Yes, I went a journey of forty versts into the country. Didn’t you know?”
The prosecutor and Nikolay Parfenovitch exchanged glances.
“Well, how would it be if you began your story with a systematicdescription of all you did yesterday, from the morning onwards? Allow us,for instance, to inquire why you were absent from the town, and just whenyou left and when you came back—all those facts.”
“You should have asked me like that from the beginning,” cried Mitya,laughing aloud, “and, if you like, we won’t begin from yesterday, but fromthe morning of the day before; then you’ll understand how, why, and whereI went. I went the day before yesterday, gentlemen, to a merchant of thetown, called Samsonov, to borrow three thousand roubles from him on safesecurity. It was a pressing matter, gentlemen, it was a sudden necessity.”
“Allow me to interrupt you,” the prosecutor put in politely. “Why were youin such pressing need for just that sum, three thousand?”
“Oh, gentlemen, you needn’t go into details, how, when and why, and whyjust so much money, and not so much, and all that rigmarole. Why, it’llrun to three volumes, and then you’ll want an epilogue!”
Mitya said all this with the good‐natured but impatient familiarity of aman who is anxious to tell the whole truth and is full of the bestintentions.
“Gentlemen!”—he corrected himself hurriedly—“don’t be vexed with me for myrestiveness, I beg you again. Believe me once more, I feel the greatestrespect for you and understand the true position of affairs. Don’t thinkI’m drunk. I’m quite sober now. And, besides, being drunk would be nohindrance. It’s with me, you know, like the saying: ‘When he is sober, heis a fool; when he is drunk, he is a wise man.’ Ha ha! But I see,gentlemen, it’s not the proper thing to make jokes to you, till we’ve hadour explanation, I mean. And I’ve my own dignity to keep up, too. I quiteunderstand the difference for the moment. I am, after all, in the positionof a criminal, and so, far from being on equal terms with you. And it’syour business to watch me. I can’t expect you to pat me on the head forwhat I did to Grigory, for one can’t break old men’s heads with impunity.I suppose you’ll put me away for him for six months, or a year perhaps, ina house of correction. I don’t know what the punishment is—but it will bewithout loss of the rights of my rank, without loss of my rank, won’t it?So you see, gentlemen, I understand the distinction between us.... But youmust see that you could puzzle God Himself with such questions. ‘How didyou step? Where did you step? When did you step? And on what did youstep?’ I shall get mixed up, if you go on like this, and you will put itall down against me. And what will that lead to? To nothing! And even ifit’s nonsense I’m talking now, let me finish, and you, gentlemen, beingmen of honor and refinement, will forgive me! I’ll finish by asking you,gentlemen, to drop that conventional method of questioning. I mean,beginning from some miserable trifle, how I got up, what I had forbreakfast, how I spat, and where I spat, and so distracting the attentionof the criminal, suddenly stun him with an overwhelming question, ‘Whomdid you murder? Whom did you rob?’ Ha ha! That’s your regulation method,that’s where all your cunning comes in. You can put peasants off theirguard like that, but not me. I know the tricks. I’ve been in the service,too. Ha ha ha! You’re not angry, gentlemen? You forgive my impertinence?”he cried, looking at them with a good‐nature that was almost surprising.“It’s only Mitya Karamazov, you know, so you can overlook it. It would beinexcusable in a sensible man; but you can forgive it in Mitya. Ha ha!”
Nikolay Parfenovitch listened, and laughed too. Though the prosecutor didnot laugh, he kept his eyes fixed keenly on Mitya, as though anxious notto miss the least syllable, the slightest movement, the smallest twitch ofany feature of his face.
“That’s how we have treated you from the beginning,” said NikolayParfenovitch, still laughing. “We haven’t tried to put you out by askinghow you got up in the morning and what you had for breakfast. We began,indeed, with questions of the greatest importance.”
“I understand. I saw it and appreciated it, and I appreciate still moreyour present kindness to me, an unprecedented kindness, worthy of yournoble hearts. We three here are gentlemen, and let everything be on thefooting of mutual confidence between educated, well‐bred people, who havethe common bond of noble birth and honor. In any case, allow me to lookupon you as my best friends at this moment of my life, at this moment whenmy honor is assailed. That’s no offense to you, gentlemen, is it?”
“On the contrary. You’ve expressed all that so well, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,”Nikolay Parfenovitch answered with dignified approbation.
“And enough of those trivial questions, gentlemen, all those trickyquestions!” cried Mitya enthusiastically. “Or there’s simply no knowingwhere we shall get to! Is there?”
“I will follow your sensible advice entirely,” the prosecutor interposed,addressing Mitya. “I don’t withdraw my question, however. It is nowvitally important for us to know exactly why you needed that sum, I meanprecisely three thousand.”
“Why I needed it?... Oh, for one thing and another.... Well, it was to paya debt.”
“A debt to whom?”
“That I absolutely refuse to answer, gentlemen. Not because I couldn’t, orbecause I shouldn’t dare, or because it would be damaging, for it’s all apaltry matter and absolutely trifling, but—I won’t, because it’s a matterof principle: that’s my private life, and I won’t allow any intrusion intomy private life. That’s my principle. Your question has no bearing on thecase, and whatever has nothing to do with the case is my private affair. Iwanted to pay a debt. I wanted to pay a debt of honor but to whom I won’tsay.”
“Allow me to make a note of that,” said the prosecutor.
“By all means. Write down that I won’t say, that I won’t. Write that Ishould think it dishonorable to say. Ech! you can write it; you’ve nothingelse to do with your time.”
“Allow me to caution you, sir, and to remind you once more, if you areunaware of it,” the prosecutor began, with a peculiar and sternimpressiveness, “that you have a perfect right not to answer the questionsput to you now, and we on our side have no right to extort an answer fromyou, if you decline to give it for one reason or another. That is entirelya matter for your personal decision. But it is our duty, on the otherhand, in such cases as the present, to explain and set before you thedegree of injury you will be doing yourself by refusing to give this orthat piece of evidence. After which I will beg you to continue.”
“Gentlemen, I’m not angry ... I ...” Mitya muttered in a ratherdisconcerted tone. “Well, gentlemen, you see, that Samsonov to whom I wentthen ...”
We will, of course, not reproduce his account of what is known to thereader already. Mitya was impatiently anxious not to omit the slightestdetail. At the same time he was in a hurry to get it over. But as he gavehis evidence it was written down, and therefore they had continually topull him up. Mitya disliked this, but submitted; got angry, though stillgood‐humoredly. He did, it is true, exclaim, from time to time,“Gentlemen, that’s enough to make an angel out of patience!” Or,“Gentlemen, it’s no good your irritating me.”
But even though he exclaimed he still preserved for a time his geniallyexpansive mood. So he told them how Samsonov had made a fool of him twodays before. (He had completely realized by now that he had been fooled.)The sale of his watch for six roubles to obtain money for the journey wassomething new to the lawyers. They were at once greatly interested, andeven, to Mitya’s intense indignation, thought it necessary to write thefact down as a secondary confirmation of the circumstance that he hadhardly a farthing in his pocket at the time. Little by little Mitya beganto grow surly. Then, after describing his journey to see Lyagavy, thenight spent in the stifling hut, and so on, he came to his return to thetown. Here he began, without being particularly urged, to give a minuteaccount of the agonies of jealousy he endured on Grushenka’s account.
He was heard with silent attention. They inquired particularly into thecircumstance of his having a place of ambush in Marya Kondratyevna’s houseat the back of Fyodor Pavlovitch’s garden to keep watch on Grushenka, andof Smerdyakov’s bringing him information. They laid particular stress onthis, and noted it down. Of his jealousy he spoke warmly and at length,and though inwardly ashamed at exposing his most intimate feelings to“public ignominy,” so to speak, he evidently overcame his shame in orderto tell the truth. The frigid severity, with which the investigatinglawyer, and still more the prosecutor, stared intently at him as he toldhis story, disconcerted him at last considerably.
“That boy, Nikolay Parfenovitch, to whom I was talking nonsense aboutwomen only a few days ago, and that sickly prosecutor are not worth mytelling this to,” he reflected mournfully. “It’s ignominious. ‘Be patient,humble, hold thy peace.’ ” He wound up his reflections with that line. Buthe pulled himself together to go on again. When he came to telling of hisvisit to Madame Hohlakov, he regained his spirits and even wished to tella little anecdote of that lady which had nothing to do with the case. Butthe investigating lawyer stopped him, and civilly suggested that he shouldpass on to “more essential matters.” At last, when he described hisdespair and told them how, when he left Madame Hohlakov’s, he thought thathe’d “get three thousand if he had to murder some one to do it,” theystopped him again and noted down that he had “meant to murder some one.”Mitya let them write it without protest. At last he reached the point inhis story when he learned that Grushenka had deceived him and had returnedfrom Samsonov’s as soon as he left her there, though she had said that shewould stay there till midnight.
“If I didn’t kill Fenya then, gentlemen, it was only because I hadn’ttime,” broke from him suddenly at that point in his story. That, too, wascarefully written down. Mitya waited gloomily, and was beginning to tellhow he ran into his father’s garden when the investigating lawyer suddenlystopped him, and opening the big portfolio that lay on the sofa beside himhe brought out the brass pestle.
“Do you recognize this object?” he asked, showing it to Mitya.
“Oh, yes,” he laughed gloomily. “Of course I recognize it. Let me have alook at it.... Damn it, never mind!”
“You have forgotten to mention it,” observed the investigating lawyer.
“Hang it all, I shouldn’t have concealed it from you. Do you suppose Icould have managed without it? It simply escaped my memory.”
“Be so good as to tell us precisely how you came to arm yourself with it.”
“Certainly I will be so good, gentlemen.”
And Mitya described how he took the pestle and ran.
“But what object had you in view in arming yourself with such a weapon?”
“What object? No object. I just picked it up and ran off.”
“What for, if you had no object?”
Mitya’s wrath flared up. He looked intently at “the boy” and smiledgloomily and malignantly. He was feeling more and more ashamed at havingtold “such people” the story of his jealousy so sincerely andspontaneously.
“Bother the pestle!” broke from him suddenly.
“But still—”
“Oh, to keep off dogs.... Oh, because it was dark.... In case anythingturned up.”
“But have you ever on previous occasions taken a weapon with you when youwent out, since you’re afraid of the dark?”
“Ugh! damn it all, gentlemen! There’s positively no talking to you!” criedMitya, exasperated beyond endurance, and turning to the secretary, crimsonwith anger, he said quickly, with a note of fury in his voice:
“Write down at once ... at once ... ‘that I snatched up the pestle to goand kill my father ... Fyodor Pavlovitch ... by hitting him on the headwith it!’ Well, now are you satisfied, gentlemen? Are your mindsrelieved?” he said, glaring defiantly at the lawyers.
“We quite understand that you made that statement just now throughexasperation with us and the questions we put to you, which you considertrivial, though they are, in fact, essential,” the prosecutor remarkeddryly in reply.
“Well, upon my word, gentlemen! Yes, I took the pestle.... What does onepick things up for at such moments? I don’t know what for. I snatched itup and ran—that’s all. For to me, gentlemen, _passons_, or I declare Iwon’t tell you any more.”
He sat with his elbows on the table and his head in his hand. He satsideways to them and gazed at the wall, struggling against a feeling ofnausea. He had, in fact, an awful inclination to get up and declare thathe wouldn’t say another word, “not if you hang me for it.”
“You see, gentlemen,” he said at last, with difficulty controllinghimself, “you see. I listen to you and am haunted by a dream.... It’s adream I have sometimes, you know.... I often dream it—it’s always the same... that some one is hunting me, some one I’m awfully afraid of ... thathe’s hunting me in the dark, in the night ... tracking me, and I hidesomewhere from him, behind a door or cupboard, hide in a degrading way,and the worst of it is, he always knows where I am, but he pretends not toknow where I am on purpose, to prolong my agony, to enjoy my terror....That’s just what you’re doing now. It’s just like that!”
“Is that the sort of thing you dream about?” inquired the prosecutor.
“Yes, it is. Don’t you want to write it down?” said Mitya, with adistorted smile.
“No; no need to write it down. But still you do have curious dreams.”
“It’s not a question of dreams now, gentlemen—this is realism, this isreal life! I’m a wolf and you’re the hunters. Well, hunt him down!”
“You are wrong to make such comparisons ...” began Nikolay Parfenovitch,with extraordinary softness.
“No, I’m not wrong, not at all!” Mitya flared up again, though hisoutburst of wrath had obviously relieved his heart. He grew more good‐humored at every word. “You may not trust a criminal or a man on trialtortured by your questions, but an honorable man, the honorable impulsesof the heart (I say that boldly!)—no! That you must believe you have noright indeed ... but—

    Be silent, heart,    Be patient, humble, hold thy peace.

Well, shall I go on?” he broke off gloomily.
“If you’ll be so kind,” answered Nikolay Parfenovitch.


Chapter V. The Third Ordeal

Though Mitya spoke sullenly, it was evident that he was trying more thanever not to forget or miss a single detail of his story. He told them howhe had leapt over the fence into his father’s garden; how he had gone upto the window; told them all that had passed under the window. Clearly,precisely, distinctly, he described the feelings that troubled him duringthose moments in the garden when he longed so terribly to know whetherGrushenka was with his father or not. But, strange to say, both thelawyers listened now with a sort of awful reserve, looked coldly at him,asked few questions. Mitya could gather nothing from their faces.
“They’re angry and offended,” he thought. “Well, bother them!”
When he described how he made up his mind at last to make the “signal” tohis father that Grushenka had come, so that he should open the window, thelawyers paid no attention to the word “signal,” as though they entirelyfailed to grasp the meaning of the word in this connection: so much so,that Mitya noticed it. Coming at last to the moment when, seeing hisfather peering out of the window, his hatred flared up and he pulled thepestle out of his pocket, he suddenly, as though of design, stopped short.He sat gazing at the wall and was aware that their eyes were fixed uponhim.
“Well?” said the investigating lawyer. “You pulled out the weapon and ...and what happened then?”
“Then? Why, then I murdered him ... hit him on the head and cracked hisskull.... I suppose that’s your story. That’s it!”
His eyes suddenly flashed. All his smothered wrath suddenly flamed up withextraordinary violence in his soul.
“Our story?” repeated Nikolay Parfenovitch. “Well—and yours?”
Mitya dropped his eyes and was a long time silent.
“My story, gentlemen? Well, it was like this,” he began softly. “Whetherit was some one’s tears, or my mother prayed to God, or a good angelkissed me at that instant, I don’t know. But the devil was conquered. Irushed from the window and ran to the fence. My father was alarmed and,for the first time, he saw me then, cried out, and sprang back from thewindow. I remember that very well. I ran across the garden to the fence... and there Grigory caught me, when I was sitting on the fence.”
At that point he raised his eyes at last and looked at his listeners. Theyseemed to be staring at him with perfectly unruffled attention. A sort ofparoxysm of indignation seized on Mitya’s soul.
“Why, you’re laughing at me at this moment, gentlemen!” he broke offsuddenly.
“What makes you think that?” observed Nikolay Parfenovitch.
“You don’t believe one word—that’s why! I understand, of course, that Ihave come to the vital point. The old man’s lying there now with his skullbroken, while I—after dramatically describing how I wanted to kill him,and how I snatched up the pestle—I suddenly run away from the window. Aromance! Poetry! As though one could believe a fellow on his word. Ha ha!You are scoffers, gentlemen!”
And he swung round on his chair so that it creaked.
“And did you notice,” asked the prosecutor suddenly, as though notobserving Mitya’s excitement, “did you notice when you ran away from thewindow, whether the door into the garden was open?”
“No, it was not open.”
“It was not?”
“It was shut. And who could open it? Bah! the door. Wait a bit!” he seemedsuddenly to bethink himself, and almost with a start:
“Why, did you find the door open?”
“Yes, it was open.”
“Why, who could have opened it if you did not open it yourselves?” criedMitya, greatly astonished.
“The door stood open, and your father’s murderer undoubtedly went in atthat door, and, having accomplished the crime, went out again by the samedoor,” the prosecutor pronounced deliberately, as though chiseling outeach word separately. “That is perfectly clear. The murder was committedin the room and _not through the __ window_; that is absolutely certainfrom the examination that has been made, from the position of the body andeverything. There can be no doubt of that circumstance.”
Mitya was absolutely dumbfounded.
“But that’s utterly impossible!” he cried, completely at a loss. “I ... Ididn’t go in.... I tell you positively, definitely, the door was shut thewhole time I was in the garden, and when I ran out of the garden. I onlystood at the window and saw him through the window. That’s all, that’sall.... I remember to the last minute. And if I didn’t remember, it wouldbe just the same. I know it, for no one knew the signals exceptSmerdyakov, and me, and the dead man. And he wouldn’t have opened the doorto any one in the world without the signals.”
“Signals? What signals?” asked the prosecutor, with greedy, almosthysterical, curiosity. He instantly lost all trace of his reserve anddignity. He asked the question with a sort of cringing timidity. Hescented an important fact of which he had known nothing, and was alreadyfilled with dread that Mitya might be unwilling to disclose it.
“So you didn’t know!” Mitya winked at him with a malicious and mockingsmile. “What if I won’t tell you? From whom could you find out? No oneknew about the signals except my father, Smerdyakov, and me: that was all.Heaven knew, too, but it won’t tell you. But it’s an interesting fact.There’s no knowing what you might build on it. Ha ha! Take comfort,gentlemen, I’ll reveal it. You’ve some foolish idea in your hearts. Youdon’t know the man you have to deal with! You have to do with a prisonerwho gives evidence against himself, to his own damage! Yes, for I’m a manof honor and you—are not.”
The prosecutor swallowed this without a murmur. He was trembling withimpatience to hear the new fact. Minutely and diffusely Mitya told themeverything about the signals invented by Fyodor Pavlovitch for Smerdyakov.He told them exactly what every tap on the window meant, tapped thesignals on the table, and when Nikolay Parfenovitch said that he supposedhe, Mitya, had tapped the signal “Grushenka has come,” when he tapped tohis father, he answered precisely that he had tapped that signal, that“Grushenka had come.”
“So now you can build up your tower,” Mitya broke off, and again turnedaway from them contemptuously.
“So no one knew of the signals but your dead father, you, and the valetSmerdyakov? And no one else?” Nikolay Parfenovitch inquired once more.
“Yes. The valet Smerdyakov, and Heaven. Write down about Heaven. That maybe of use. Besides, you will need God yourselves.”
And they had already, of course, begun writing it down. But while theywrote, the prosecutor said suddenly, as though pitching on a new idea:
“But if Smerdyakov also knew of these signals and you absolutely deny allresponsibility for the death of your father, was it not he, perhaps, whoknocked the signal agreed upon, induced your father to open to him, andthen ... committed the crime?”
Mitya turned upon him a look of profound irony and intense hatred. Hissilent stare lasted so long that it made the prosecutor blink.
“You’ve caught the fox again,” commented Mitya at last; “you’ve got thebeast by the tail. Ha ha! I see through you, Mr. Prosecutor. You thought,of course, that I should jump at that, catch at your prompting, and shoutwith all my might, ‘Aie! it’s Smerdyakov; he’s the murderer.’ Confessthat’s what you thought. Confess, and I’ll go on.”
But the prosecutor did not confess. He held his tongue and waited.
“You’re mistaken. I’m not going to shout ‘It’s Smerdyakov,’ ” said Mitya.
“And you don’t even suspect him?”
“Why, do you suspect him?”
“He is suspected, too.”
Mitya fixed his eyes on the floor.
“Joking apart,” he brought out gloomily. “Listen. From the very beginning,almost from the moment when I ran out to you from behind the curtain, I’vehad the thought of Smerdyakov in my mind. I’ve been sitting here, shoutingthat I’m innocent and thinking all the time ‘Smerdyakov!’ I can’t getSmerdyakov out of my head. In fact, I, too, thought of Smerdyakov justnow; but only for a second. Almost at once I thought, ‘No, it’s notSmerdyakov.’ It’s not his doing, gentlemen.”
“In that case is there anybody else you suspect?” Nikolay Parfenovitchinquired cautiously.
“I don’t know any one it could be, whether it’s the hand of Heaven orSatan, but ... not Smerdyakov,” Mitya jerked out with decision.
“But what makes you affirm so confidently and emphatically that it’s nothe?”
“From my conviction—my impression. Because Smerdyakov is a man of the mostabject character and a coward. He’s not a coward, he’s the epitome of allthe cowardice in the world walking on two legs. He has the heart of achicken. When he talked to me, he was always trembling for fear I shouldkill him, though I never raised my hand against him. He fell at my feetand blubbered; he has kissed these very boots, literally, beseeching me‘not to frighten him.’ Do you hear? ‘Not to frighten him.’ What a thing tosay! Why, I offered him money. He’s a puling chicken—sickly, epileptic,weak‐minded—a child of eight could thrash him. He has no character worthtalking about. It’s not Smerdyakov, gentlemen. He doesn’t care for money;he wouldn’t take my presents. Besides, what motive had he for murderingthe old man? Why, he’s very likely his son, you know—his natural son. Doyou know that?”
“We have heard that legend. But you are your father’s son, too, you know;yet you yourself told every one you meant to murder him.”
“That’s a thrust! And a nasty, mean one, too! I’m not afraid! Oh,gentlemen, isn’t it too base of you to say that to my face? It’s base,because I told you that myself. I not only wanted to murder him, but Imight have done it. And, what’s more, I went out of my way to tell you ofmy own accord that I nearly murdered him. But, you see, I didn’t murderhim; you see, my guardian angel saved me—that’s what you’ve not taken intoaccount. And that’s why it’s so base of you. For I didn’t kill him, Ididn’t kill him! Do you hear, I did not kill him.”
He was almost choking. He had not been so moved before during the wholeinterrogation.
“And what has he told you, gentlemen—Smerdyakov, I mean?” he addedsuddenly, after a pause. “May I ask that question?”
“You may ask any question,” the prosecutor replied with frigid severity,“any question relating to the facts of the case, and we are, I repeat,bound to answer every inquiry you make. We found the servant Smerdyakov,concerning whom you inquire, lying unconscious in his bed, in an epilepticfit of extreme severity, that had recurred, possibly, ten times. Thedoctor who was with us told us, after seeing him, that he may possibly notoutlive the night.”
“Well, if that’s so, the devil must have killed him,” broke suddenly fromMitya, as though until that moment he had been asking himself: “Was itSmerdyakov or not?”
“We will come back to this later,” Nikolay Parfenovitch decided. “Now,wouldn’t you like to continue your statement?”
Mitya asked for a rest. His request was courteously granted. Afterresting, he went on with his story. But he was evidently depressed. He wasexhausted, mortified and morally shaken. To make things worse theprosecutor exasperated him, as though intentionally, by vexatiousinterruptions about “trifling points.” Scarcely had Mitya described how,sitting on the wall, he had struck Grigory on the head with the pestle,while the old man had hold of his left leg, and how he had then jumpeddown to look at him, when the prosecutor stopped him to ask him todescribe exactly how he was sitting on the wall. Mitya was surprised.
“Oh, I was sitting like this, astride, one leg on one side of the wall andone on the other.”
“And the pestle?”
“The pestle was in my hand.”
“Not in your pocket? Do you remember that precisely? Was it a violent blowyou gave him?”
“It must have been a violent one. But why do you ask?”
“Would you mind sitting on the chair just as you sat on the wall then andshowing us just how you moved your arm, and in what direction?”
“You’re making fun of me, aren’t you?” asked Mitya, looking haughtily atthe speaker; but the latter did not flinch.
Mitya turned abruptly, sat astride on his chair, and swung his arm.
“This was how I struck him! That’s how I knocked him down! What more doyou want?”
“Thank you. May I trouble you now to explain why you jumped down, withwhat object, and what you had in view?”
“Oh, hang it!... I jumped down to look at the man I’d hurt ... I don’tknow what for!”
“Though you were so excited and were running away?”
“Yes, though I was excited and running away.”
“You wanted to help him?”
“Help!... Yes, perhaps I did want to help him.... I don’t remember.”
“You don’t remember? Then you didn’t quite know what you were doing?”
“Not at all. I remember everything—every detail. I jumped down to look athim, and wiped his face with my handkerchief.”
“We have seen your handkerchief. Did you hope to restore him toconsciousness?”
“I don’t know whether I hoped it. I simply wanted to make sure whether hewas alive or not.”
“Ah! You wanted to be sure? Well, what then?”
“I’m not a doctor. I couldn’t decide. I ran away thinking I’d killed him.And now he’s recovered.”
“Excellent,” commented the prosecutor. “Thank you. That’s all I wanted.Kindly proceed.”
Alas! it never entered Mitya’s head to tell them, though he remembered it,that he had jumped back from pity, and standing over the prostrate figurehad even uttered some words of regret: “You’ve come to grief, oldman—there’s no help for it. Well, there you must lie.”
The prosecutor could only draw one conclusion: that the man had jumpedback “at such a moment and in such excitement simply with the object ofascertaining whether the _only_ witness of his crime were dead; that hemust therefore have been a man of great strength, coolness, decision andforesight even at such a moment,” ... and so on. The prosecutor wassatisfied: “I’ve provoked the nervous fellow by ‘trifles’ and he has saidmore than he meant to.”
With painful effort Mitya went on. But this time he was pulled upimmediately by Nikolay Parfenovitch.
“How came you to run to the servant, Fedosya Markovna, with your hands socovered with blood, and, as it appears, your face, too?”
“Why, I didn’t notice the blood at all at the time,” answered Mitya.
“That’s quite likely. It does happen sometimes.” The prosecutor exchangedglances with Nikolay Parfenovitch.
“I simply didn’t notice. You’re quite right there, prosecutor,” Mityaassented suddenly.
Next came the account of Mitya’s sudden determination to “step aside” andmake way for their happiness. But he could not make up his mind to openhis heart to them as before, and tell them about “the queen of his soul.”He disliked speaking of her before these chilly persons “who werefastening on him like bugs.” And so in response to their reiteratedquestions he answered briefly and abruptly:
“Well, I made up my mind to kill myself. What had I left to live for? Thatquestion stared me in the face. Her first rightful lover had come back,the man who wronged her but who’d hurried back to offer his love, afterfive years, and atone for the wrong with marriage.... So I knew it was allover for me.... And behind me disgrace, and that blood—Grigory’s.... Whathad I to live for? So I went to redeem the pistols I had pledged, to loadthem and put a bullet in my brain to‐morrow.”
“And a grand feast the night before?”
“Yes, a grand feast the night before. Damn it all, gentlemen! Do makehaste and finish it. I meant to shoot myself not far from here, beyond thevillage, and I’d planned to do it at five o’clock in the morning. And Ihad a note in my pocket already. I wrote it at Perhotin’s when I loaded mypistols. Here’s the letter. Read it! It’s not for you I tell it,” he addedcontemptuously. He took it from his waistcoat pocket and flung it on thetable. The lawyers read it with curiosity, and, as is usual, added it tothe papers connected with the case.
“And you didn’t even think of washing your hands at Perhotin’s? You werenot afraid then of arousing suspicion?”
“What suspicion? Suspicion or not, I should have galloped here just thesame, and shot myself at five o’clock, and you wouldn’t have been in timeto do anything. If it hadn’t been for what’s happened to my father, youwould have known nothing about it, and wouldn’t have come here. Oh, it’sthe devil’s doing. It was the devil murdered father, it was through thedevil that you found it out so soon. How did you manage to get here soquick? It’s marvelous, a dream!”
“Mr. Perhotin informed us that when you came to him, you held in yourhands ... your blood‐stained hands ... your money ... a lot of money ... abundle of hundred‐rouble notes, and that his servant‐boy saw it too.”
“That’s true, gentlemen. I remember it was so.”
“Now, there’s one little point presents itself. Can you inform us,”Nikolay Parfenovitch began, with extreme gentleness, “where did you get somuch money all of a sudden, when it appears from the facts, from thereckoning of time, that you had not been home?”
The prosecutor’s brows contracted at the question being asked so plainly,but he did not interrupt Nikolay Parfenovitch.
“No, I didn’t go home,” answered Mitya, apparently perfectly composed, butlooking at the floor.
“Allow me then to repeat my question,” Nikolay Parfenovitch went on asthough creeping up to the subject. “Where were you able to procure such asum all at once, when by your own confession, at five o’clock the same dayyou—”
“I was in want of ten roubles and pledged my pistols with Perhotin, andthen went to Madame Hohlakov to borrow three thousand which she wouldn’tgive me, and so on, and all the rest of it,” Mitya interrupted sharply.“Yes, gentlemen, I was in want of it, and suddenly thousands turned up,eh? Do you know, gentlemen, you’re both afraid now ‘what if he won’t tellus where he got it?’ That’s just how it is. I’m not going to tell you,gentlemen. You’ve guessed right. You’ll never know,” said Mitya, chippingout each word with extraordinary determination. The lawyers were silentfor a moment.
“You must understand, Mr. Karamazov, that it is of vital importance for usto know,” said Nikolay Parfenovitch, softly and suavely.
“I understand; but still I won’t tell you.”
The prosecutor, too, intervened, and again reminded the prisoner that hewas at liberty to refuse to answer questions, if he thought it to hisinterest, and so on. But in view of the damage he might do himself by hissilence, especially in a case of such importance as—
“And so on, gentlemen, and so on. Enough! I’ve heard that rigmarolebefore,” Mitya interrupted again. “I can see for myself how important itis, and that this is the vital point, and still I won’t say.”
“What is it to us? It’s not our business, but yours. You are doingyourself harm,” observed Nikolay Parfenovitch nervously.
“You see, gentlemen, joking apart”—Mitya lifted his eyes and looked firmlyat them both—“I had an inkling from the first that we should come tologgerheads at this point. But at first when I began to give my evidence,it was all still far away and misty; it was all floating, and I was sosimple that I began with the supposition of mutual confidence existingbetween us. Now I can see for myself that such confidence is out of thequestion, for in any case we were bound to come to this cursed stumbling‐block. And now we’ve come to it! It’s impossible and there’s an end of it!But I don’t blame you. You can’t believe it all simply on my word. Iunderstand that, of course.”
He relapsed into gloomy silence.
“Couldn’t you, without abandoning your resolution to be silent about thechief point, could you not, at the same time, give us some slight hint asto the nature of the motives which are strong enough to induce you torefuse to answer, at a crisis so full of danger to you?”
Mitya smiled mournfully, almost dreamily.
“I’m much more good‐natured than you think, gentlemen. I’ll tell you thereason why and give you that hint, though you don’t deserve it. I won’tspeak of that, gentlemen, because it would be a stain on my honor. Theanswer to the question where I got the money would expose me to fargreater disgrace than the murder and robbing of my father, if I hadmurdered and robbed him. That’s why I can’t tell you. I can’t for fear ofdisgrace. What, gentlemen, are you going to write that down?”
“Yes, we’ll write it down,” lisped Nikolay Parfenovitch.
“You ought not to write that down about ‘disgrace.’ I only told you thatin the goodness of my heart. I needn’t have told you. I made you a presentof it, so to speak, and you pounce upon it at once. Oh, well, write—writewhat you like,” he concluded, with scornful disgust. “I’m not afraid ofyou and I can still hold up my head before you.”
“And can’t you tell us the nature of that disgrace?” Nikolay Parfenovitchhazarded.
The prosecutor frowned darkly.
“No, no, _c’est fini_, don’t trouble yourselves. It’s not worth whilesoiling one’s hands. I have soiled myself enough through you as it is.You’re not worth it—no one is ... Enough, gentlemen. I’m not going on.”
This was said too peremptorily. Nikolay Parfenovitch did not insistfurther, but from Ippolit Kirillovitch’s eyes he saw that he had not givenup hope.
“Can you not, at least, tell us what sum you had in your hands when youwent into Mr. Perhotin’s—how many roubles exactly?”
“I can’t tell you that.”
“You spoke to Mr. Perhotin, I believe, of having received three thousandfrom Madame Hohlakov.”
“Perhaps I did. Enough, gentlemen. I won’t say how much I had.”
“Will you be so good then as to tell us how you came here and what youhave done since you arrived?”
“Oh! you might ask the people here about that. But I’ll tell you if youlike.”
He proceeded to do so, but we won’t repeat his story. He told it dryly andcurtly. Of the raptures of his love he said nothing, but told them that heabandoned his determination to shoot himself, owing to “new factors in thecase.” He told the story without going into motives or details. And thistime the lawyers did not worry him much. It was obvious that there was noessential point of interest to them here.
“We shall verify all that. We will come back to it during the examinationof the witnesses, which will, of course, take place in your presence,”said Nikolay Parfenovitch in conclusion. “And now allow me to request youto lay on the table everything in your possession, especially all themoney you still have about you.”
“My money, gentlemen? Certainly. I understand that that is necessary. I’msurprised, indeed, that you haven’t inquired about it before. It’s true Icouldn’t get away anywhere. I’m sitting here where I can be seen. Buthere’s my money—count it—take it. That’s all, I think.”
He turned it all out of his pockets; even the small change—two pieces oftwenty copecks—he pulled out of his waistcoat pocket. They counted themoney, which amounted to eight hundred and thirty‐six roubles, and fortycopecks.
“And is that all?” asked the investigating lawyer.
“Yes.”
“You stated just now in your evidence that you spent three hundred roublesat Plotnikovs’. You gave Perhotin ten, your driver twenty, here you losttwo hundred, then....”
Nikolay Parfenovitch reckoned it all up. Mitya helped him readily. Theyrecollected every farthing and included it in the reckoning. NikolayParfenovitch hurriedly added up the total.
“With this eight hundred you must have had about fifteen hundred atfirst?”
“I suppose so,” snapped Mitya.
“How is it they all assert there was much more?”
“Let them assert it.”
“But you asserted it yourself.”
“Yes, I did, too.”
“We will compare all this with the evidence of other persons not yetexamined. Don’t be anxious about your money. It will be properly takencare of and be at your disposal at the conclusion of ... what is beginning... if it appears, or, so to speak, is proved that you have undisputedright to it. Well, and now....”
Nikolay Parfenovitch suddenly got up, and informed Mitya firmly that itwas his duty and obligation to conduct a minute and thorough search “ofyour clothes and everything else....”
“By all means, gentlemen. I’ll turn out all my pockets, if you like.”
And he did, in fact, begin turning out his pockets.
“It will be necessary to take off your clothes, too.”
“What! Undress? Ugh! Damn it! Won’t you search me as I am! Can’t you?”
“It’s utterly impossible, Dmitri Fyodorovitch. You must take off yourclothes.”
“As you like,” Mitya submitted gloomily; “only, please, not here, butbehind the curtains. Who will search them?”
“Behind the curtains, of course.”
Nikolay Parfenovitch bent his head in assent. His small face wore anexpression of peculiar solemnity.


Chapter VI. The Prosecutor Catches Mitya

Something utterly unexpected and amazing to Mitya followed. He couldnever, even a minute before, have conceived that any one could behave likethat to him, Mitya Karamazov. What was worst of all, there was somethinghumiliating in it, and on their side something “supercilious andscornful.” It was nothing to take off his coat, but he was asked toundress further, or rather not asked but “commanded,” he quite understoodthat. From pride and contempt he submitted without a word. Severalpeasants accompanied the lawyers and remained on the same side of thecurtain. “To be ready if force is required,” thought Mitya, “and perhapsfor some other reason, too.”
“Well, must I take off my shirt, too?” he asked sharply, but NikolayParfenovitch did not answer. He was busily engaged with the prosecutor inexamining the coat, the trousers, the waistcoat and the cap; and it wasevident that they were both much interested in the scrutiny. “They make nobones about it,” thought Mitya, “they don’t keep up the most elementarypoliteness.”
“I ask you for the second time—need I take off my shirt or not?” he said,still more sharply and irritably.
“Don’t trouble yourself. We will tell you what to do,” NikolayParfenovitch said, and his voice was positively peremptory, or so itseemed to Mitya.
Meantime a consultation was going on in undertones between the lawyers.There turned out to be on the coat, especially on the left side at theback, a huge patch of blood, dry, and still stiff. There were bloodstainson the trousers, too. Nikolay Parfenovitch, moreover, in the presence ofthe peasant witnesses, passed his fingers along the collar, the cuffs, andall the seams of the coat and trousers, obviously looking forsomething—money, of course. He didn’t even hide from Mitya his suspicionthat he was capable of sewing money up in his clothes.
“He treats me not as an officer but as a thief,” Mitya muttered tohimself. They communicated their ideas to one another with amazingfrankness. The secretary, for instance, who was also behind the curtain,fussing about and listening, called Nikolay Parfenovitch’s attention tothe cap, which they were also fingering.
“You remember Gridyenko, the copying‐clerk,” observed the secretary. “Lastsummer he received the wages of the whole office, and pretended to havelost the money when he was drunk. And where was it found? Why, in justsuch pipings in his cap. The hundred‐rouble notes were screwed up inlittle rolls and sewed in the piping.”
Both the lawyers remembered Gridyenko’s case perfectly, and so laid asideMitya’s cap, and decided that all his clothes must be more thoroughlyexamined later.
“Excuse me,” cried Nikolay Parfenovitch, suddenly, noticing that the rightcuff of Mitya’s shirt was turned in, and covered with blood, “excuse me,what’s that, blood?”
“Yes,” Mitya jerked out.
“That is, what blood? ... and why is the cuff turned in?”
Mitya told him how he had got the sleeve stained with blood looking afterGrigory, and had turned it inside when he was washing his hands atPerhotin’s.
“You must take off your shirt, too. That’s very important as materialevidence.”
Mitya flushed red and flew into a rage.
“What, am I to stay naked?” he shouted.
“Don’t disturb yourself. We will arrange something. And meanwhile take offyour socks.”
“You’re not joking? Is that really necessary?” Mitya’s eyes flashed.
“We are in no mood for joking,” answered Nikolay Parfenovitch sternly.
“Well, if I must—” muttered Mitya, and sitting down on the bed, he tookoff his socks. He felt unbearably awkward. All were clothed, while he wasnaked, and strange to say, when he was undressed he felt somehow guilty intheir presence, and was almost ready to believe himself that he wasinferior to them, and that now they had a perfect right to despise him.
“When all are undressed, one is somehow not ashamed, but when one’s theonly one undressed and everybody is looking, it’s degrading,” he keptrepeating to himself, again and again. “It’s like a dream, I’ve sometimesdreamed of being in such degrading positions.” It was a misery to him totake off his socks. They were very dirty, and so were his underclothes,and now every one could see it. And what was worse, he disliked his feet.All his life he had thought both his big toes hideous. He particularlyloathed the coarse, flat, crooked nail on the right one, and now theywould all see it. Feeling intolerably ashamed made him, at once andintentionally, rougher. He pulled off his shirt, himself.
“Would you like to look anywhere else if you’re not ashamed to?”
“No, there’s no need to, at present.”
“Well, am I to stay naked like this?” he added savagely.
“Yes, that can’t be helped for the time.... Kindly sit down here for awhile. You can wrap yourself in a quilt from the bed, and I ... I’ll seeto all this.”
All the things were shown to the witnesses. The report of the search wasdrawn up, and at last Nikolay Parfenovitch went out, and the clothes werecarried out after him. Ippolit Kirillovitch went out, too. Mitya was leftalone with the peasants, who stood in silence, never taking their eyes offhim. Mitya wrapped himself up in the quilt. He felt cold. His bare feetstuck out, and he couldn’t pull the quilt over so as to cover them.Nikolay Parfenovitch seemed to be gone a long time, “an insufferabletime.” “He thinks of me as a puppy,” thought Mitya, gnashing his teeth.“That rotten prosecutor has gone, too, contemptuous no doubt, it disgustshim to see me naked!”
Mitya imagined, however, that his clothes would be examined and returnedto him. But what was his indignation when Nikolay Parfenovitch came backwith quite different clothes, brought in behind him by a peasant.
“Here are clothes for you,” he observed airily, seeming well satisfiedwith the success of his mission. “Mr. Kalganov has kindly provided thesefor this unusual emergency, as well as a clean shirt. Luckily he had themall in his trunk. You can keep your own socks and underclothes.”
Mitya flew into a passion.
“I won’t have other people’s clothes!” he shouted menacingly, “give me myown!”
“It’s impossible!”
“Give me my own. Damn Kalganov and his clothes, too!”
It was a long time before they could persuade him. But they succeededsomehow in quieting him down. They impressed upon him that his clothes,being stained with blood, must be “included with the other materialevidence,” and that they “had not even the right to let him have them now... taking into consideration the possible outcome of the case.” Mitya atlast understood this. He subsided into gloomy silence and hurriedlydressed himself. He merely observed, as he put them on, that the clotheswere much better than his old ones, and that he disliked “gaining by thechange.” The coat was, besides, “ridiculously tight. Am I to be dressed uplike a fool ... for your amusement?”
They urged upon him again that he was exaggerating, that Kalganov was onlya little taller, so that only the trousers might be a little too long. Butthe coat turned out to be really tight in the shoulders.
“Damn it all! I can hardly button it,” Mitya grumbled. “Be so good as totell Mr. Kalganov from me that I didn’t ask for his clothes, and it’s notmy doing that they’ve dressed me up like a clown.”
“He understands that, and is sorry ... I mean, not sorry to lend you hisclothes, but sorry about all this business,” mumbled Nikolay Parfenovitch.
“Confound his sorrow! Well, where now? Am I to go on sitting here?”
He was asked to go back to the “other room.” Mitya went in, scowling withanger, and trying to avoid looking at any one. Dressed in another man’sclothes he felt himself disgraced, even in the eyes of the peasants, andof Trifon Borissovitch, whose face appeared, for some reason, in thedoorway, and vanished immediately. “He’s come to look at me dressed up,”thought Mitya. He sat down on the same chair as before. He had an absurdnightmarish feeling, as though he were out of his mind.
“Well, what now? Are you going to flog me? That’s all that’s left foryou,” he said, clenching his teeth and addressing the prosecutor. He wouldnot turn to Nikolay Parfenovitch, as though he disdained to speak to him.
“He looked too closely at my socks, and turned them inside out on purposeto show every one how dirty they were—the scoundrel!”
“Well, now we must proceed to the examination of witnesses,” observedNikolay Parfenovitch, as though in reply to Mitya’s question.
“Yes,” said the prosecutor thoughtfully, as though reflecting onsomething.
“We’ve done what we could in your interest, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,” NikolayParfenovitch went on, “but having received from you such an uncompromisingrefusal to explain to us the source from which you obtained the moneyfound upon you, we are, at the present moment—”
“What is the stone in your ring?” Mitya interrupted suddenly, as thoughawakening from a reverie. He pointed to one of the three large ringsadorning Nikolay Parfenovitch’s right hand.
“Ring?” repeated Nikolay Parfenovitch with surprise.
“Yes, that one ... on your middle finger, with the little veins in it,what stone is that?” Mitya persisted, like a peevish child.
“That’s a smoky topaz,” said Nikolay Parfenovitch, smiling. “Would youlike to look at it? I’ll take it off ...”
“No, don’t take it off,” cried Mitya furiously, suddenly waking up, andangry with himself. “Don’t take it off ... there’s no need.... Damn it!...Gentlemen, you’ve sullied my heart! Can you suppose that I would concealit from you, if I had really killed my father, that I would shuffle, lie,and hide myself? No, that’s not like Dmitri Karamazov, that he couldn’tdo, and if I were guilty, I swear I shouldn’t have waited for your coming,or for the sunrise as I meant at first, but should have killed myselfbefore this, without waiting for the dawn! I know that about myself now. Icouldn’t have learnt so much in twenty years as I’ve found out in thisaccursed night!... And should I have been like this on this night, and atthis moment, sitting with you, could I have talked like this, could I havemoved like this, could I have looked at you and at the world like this, ifI had really been the murderer of my father, when the very thought ofhaving accidentally killed Grigory gave me no peace all night—not fromfear—oh, not simply from fear of your punishment! The disgrace of it! Andyou expect me to be open with such scoffers as you, who see nothing andbelieve in nothing, blind moles and scoffers, and to tell you anothernasty thing I’ve done, another disgrace, even if that would save me fromyour accusation! No, better Siberia! The man who opened the door to myfather and went in at that door, he killed him, he robbed him. Who was he?I’m racking my brains and can’t think who. But I can tell you it was notDmitri Karamazov, and that’s all I can tell you, and that’s enough,enough, leave me alone.... Exile me, punish me, but don’t bother me anymore. I’ll say no more. Call your witnesses!”
Mitya uttered his sudden monologue as though he were determined to beabsolutely silent for the future. The prosecutor watched him the wholetime and only when he had ceased speaking, observed, as though it were themost ordinary thing, with the most frigid and composed air:
“Oh, about the open door of which you spoke just now, we may as wellinform you, by the way, now, of a very interesting piece of evidence ofthe greatest importance both to you and to us, that has been given us byGrigory, the old man you wounded. On his recovery, he clearly andemphatically stated, in reply to our questions, that when, on coming outto the steps, and hearing a noise in the garden, he made up his mind to gointo it through the little gate which stood open, before he noticed yourunning, as you have told us already, in the dark from the open windowwhere you saw your father, he, Grigory, glanced to the left, and, whilenoticing the open window, observed at the same time, much nearer to him,the door, standing wide open—that door which you have stated to have beenshut the whole time you were in the garden. I will not conceal from youthat Grigory himself confidently affirms and bears witness that you musthave run from that door, though, of course, he did not see you do so withhis own eyes, since he only noticed you first some distance away in thegarden, running towards the fence.”
Mitya had leapt up from his chair half‐way through this speech.
“Nonsense!” he yelled, in a sudden frenzy, “it’s a barefaced lie. Hecouldn’t have seen the door open because it was shut. He’s lying!”
“I consider it my duty to repeat that he is firm in his statement. He doesnot waver. He adheres to it. We’ve cross‐examined him several times.”
“Precisely. I have cross‐examined him several times,” Nikolay Parfenovitchconfirmed warmly.
“It’s false, false! It’s either an attempt to slander me, or thehallucination of a madman,” Mitya still shouted. “He’s simply raving, fromloss of blood, from the wound. He must have fancied it when he came to....He’s raving.”
“Yes, but he noticed the open door, not when he came to after hisinjuries, but before that, as soon as he went into the garden from thelodge.”
“But it’s false, it’s false! It can’t be so! He’s slandering me fromspite.... He couldn’t have seen it ... I didn’t come from the door,”gasped Mitya.
The prosecutor turned to Nikolay Parfenovitch and said to himimpressively:
“Confront him with it.”
“Do you recognize this object?”
Nikolay Parfenovitch laid upon the table a large and thick officialenvelope, on which three seals still remained intact. The envelope wasempty, and slit open at one end. Mitya stared at it with open eyes.
“It ... it must be that envelope of my father’s, the envelope thatcontained the three thousand roubles ... and if there’s inscribed on it,allow me, ‘For my little chicken’ ... yes—three thousand!” he shouted, “doyou see, three thousand, do you see?”
“Of course, we see. But we didn’t find the money in it. It was empty, andlying on the floor by the bed, behind the screen.”
For some seconds Mitya stood as though thunderstruck.
“Gentlemen, it’s Smerdyakov!” he shouted suddenly, at the top of hisvoice. “It’s he who’s murdered him! He’s robbed him! No one else knewwhere the old man hid the envelope. It’s Smerdyakov, that’s clear, now!”
“But you, too, knew of the envelope and that it was under the pillow.”
“I never knew it. I’ve never seen it. This is the first time I’ve lookedat it. I’d only heard of it from Smerdyakov.... He was the only one whoknew where the old man kept it hidden, I didn’t know ...” Mitya wascompletely breathless.
“But you told us yourself that the envelope was under your deceasedfather’s pillow. You especially stated that it was under the pillow, soyou must have known it.”
“We’ve got it written down,” confirmed Nikolay Parfenovitch.
“Nonsense! It’s absurd! I’d no idea it was under the pillow. And perhapsit wasn’t under the pillow at all.... It was just a chance guess that itwas under the pillow. What does Smerdyakov say? Have you asked him whereit was? What does Smerdyakov say? that’s the chief point.... And I wentout of my way to tell lies against myself.... I told you without thinkingthat it was under the pillow, and now you— Oh, you know how one says thewrong thing, without meaning it. No one knew but Smerdyakov, onlySmerdyakov, and no one else.... He didn’t even tell me where it was! Butit’s his doing, his doing; there’s no doubt about it, he murdered him,that’s as clear as daylight now,” Mitya exclaimed more and morefrantically, repeating himself incoherently, and growing more and moreexasperated and excited. “You must understand that, and arrest him atonce.... He must have killed him while I was running away and whileGrigory was unconscious, that’s clear now.... He gave the signal andfather opened to him ... for no one but he knew the signal, and withoutthe signal father would never have opened the door....”
“But you’re again forgetting the circumstance,” the prosecutor observed,still speaking with the same restraint, though with a note of triumph,“that there was no need to give the signal if the door already stood openwhen you were there, while you were in the garden....”
“The door, the door,” muttered Mitya, and he stared speechless at theprosecutor. He sank back helpless in his chair. All were silent.
“Yes, the door!... It’s a nightmare! God is against me!” he exclaimed,staring before him in complete stupefaction.
“Come, you see,” the prosecutor went on with dignity, “and you can judgefor yourself, Dmitri Fyodorovitch. On the one hand we have the evidence ofthe open door from which you ran out, a fact which overwhelms you and us.On the other side your incomprehensible, persistent, and, so to speak,obdurate silence with regard to the source from which you obtained themoney which was so suddenly seen in your hands, when only three hoursearlier, on your own showing, you pledged your pistols for the sake of tenroubles! In view of all these facts, judge for yourself. What are we tobelieve, and what can we depend upon? And don’t accuse us of being‘frigid, cynical, scoffing people,’ who are incapable of believing in thegenerous impulses of your heart.... Try to enter into our position ...”
Mitya was indescribably agitated. He turned pale.
“Very well!” he exclaimed suddenly. “I will tell you my secret. I’ll tellyou where I got the money!... I’ll reveal my shame, that I may not have toblame myself or you hereafter.”
“And believe me, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,” put in Nikolay Parfenovitch, in avoice of almost pathetic delight, “that every sincere and completeconfession on your part at this moment may, later on, have an immenseinfluence in your favor, and may, indeed, moreover—”
But the prosecutor gave him a slight shove under the table, and he checkedhimself in time. Mitya, it is true, had not heard him.


Chapter VII. Mitya’s Great Secret. Received With Hisses

“Gentlemen,” he began, still in the same agitation, “I want to make a fullconfession: that money was _my own_.” The lawyers’ faces lengthened. Thatwas not at all what they expected.
“How do you mean?” faltered Nikolay Parfenovitch, “when at five o’clock onthe same day, from your own confession—”
“Damn five o’clock on the same day and my own confession! That’s nothingto do with it now! That money was my own, my own, that is, stolen by me... not mine, I mean, but stolen by me, and it was fifteen hundredroubles, and I had it on me all the time, all the time ...”
“But where did you get it?”
“I took it off my neck, gentlemen, off this very neck ... it was here,round my neck, sewn up in a rag, and I’d had it round my neck a long time,it’s a month since I put it round my neck ... to my shame and disgrace!”
“And from whom did you ... appropriate it?”
“You mean, ‘steal it’? Speak out plainly now. Yes, I consider that Ipractically stole it, but, if you prefer, I ‘appropriated it.’ I considerI stole it. And last night I stole it finally.”
“Last night? But you said that it’s a month since you ... obtained it?...”
“Yes. But not from my father. Not from my father, don’t be uneasy. Ididn’t steal it from my father, but from her. Let me tell you withoutinterrupting. It’s hard to do, you know. You see, a month ago, I was sentfor by Katerina Ivanovna, formerly my betrothed. Do you know her?”
“Yes, of course.”
“I know you know her. She’s a noble creature, noblest of the noble. Butshe has hated me ever so long, oh, ever so long ... and hated me with goodreason, good reason!”
“Katerina Ivanovna!” Nikolay Parfenovitch exclaimed with wonder. Theprosecutor, too, stared.
“Oh, don’t take her name in vain! I’m a scoundrel to bring her into it.Yes, I’ve seen that she hated me ... a long while.... From the very first,even that evening at my lodging ... but enough, enough. You’re unworthyeven to know of that. No need of that at all.... I need only tell you thatshe sent for me a month ago, gave me three thousand roubles to send off toher sister and another relation in Moscow (as though she couldn’t havesent it off herself!) and I ... it was just at that fatal moment in mylife when I ... well, in fact, when I’d just come to love another, her,she’s sitting down below now, Grushenka. I carried her off here to Mokroethen, and wasted here in two days half that damned three thousand, but theother half I kept on me. Well, I’ve kept that other half, that fifteenhundred, like a locket round my neck, but yesterday I undid it, and spentit. What’s left of it, eight hundred roubles, is in your hands now,Nikolay Parfenovitch. That’s the change out of the fifteen hundred I hadyesterday.”
“Excuse me. How’s that? Why, when you were here a month ago you spentthree thousand, not fifteen hundred, everybody knows that.”
“Who knows it? Who counted the money? Did I let any one count it?”
“Why, you told every one yourself that you’d spent exactly threethousand.”
“It’s true, I did. I told the whole town so, and the whole town said so.And here, at Mokroe, too, every one reckoned it was three thousand. Yet Ididn’t spend three thousand, but fifteen hundred. And the other fifteenhundred I sewed into a little bag. That’s how it was, gentlemen. That’swhere I got that money yesterday....”
“This is almost miraculous,” murmured Nikolay Parfenovitch.
“Allow me to inquire,” observed the prosecutor at last, “have you informedany one whatever of this circumstance before, I mean that you had fifteenhundred left about you a month ago?”
“I told no one.”
“That’s strange. Do you mean absolutely no one?”
“Absolutely no one. No one and nobody.”
“What was your reason for this reticence? What was your motive for makingsuch a secret of it? To be more precise: You have told us at last yoursecret, in your words, so ‘disgraceful,’ though in reality—that is, ofcourse, comparatively speaking—this action, that is, the appropriation ofthree thousand roubles belonging to some one else, and, of course, onlyfor a time is, in my view at least, only an act of the greatestrecklessness and not so disgraceful, when one takes into considerationyour character.... Even admitting that it was an action in the highestdegree discreditable, still, discreditable is not ‘disgraceful.’... Manypeople have already guessed, during this last month, about the threethousand of Katerina Ivanovna’s, that you have spent, and I heard thelegend myself, apart from your confession.... Mihail Makarovitch, forinstance, had heard it, too, so that indeed, it was scarcely a legend, butthe gossip of the whole town. There are indications, too, if I am notmistaken, that you confessed this yourself to some one, I mean that themoney was Katerina Ivanovna’s, and so, it’s extremely surprising to methat hitherto, that is, up to the present moment, you have made such anextraordinary secret of the fifteen hundred you say you put by, apparentlyconnecting a feeling of positive horror with that secret.... It’s not easyto believe that it could cost you such distress to confess such asecret.... You cried out, just now, that Siberia would be better thanconfessing it ...”
The prosecutor ceased speaking. He was provoked. He did not conceal hisvexation, which was almost anger, and gave vent to all his accumulatedspleen, disconnectedly and incoherently, without choosing words.
“It’s not the fifteen hundred that’s the disgrace, but that I put it apartfrom the rest of the three thousand,” said Mitya firmly.
“Why?” smiled the prosecutor irritably. “What is there disgraceful, toyour thinking, in your having set aside half of the three thousand you haddiscreditably, if you prefer, ‘disgracefully,’ appropriated? Your takingthe three thousand is more important than what you did with it. And by theway, why did you do that—why did you set apart that half, for whatpurpose, for what object did you do it? Can you explain that to us?”
“Oh, gentlemen, the purpose is the whole point!” cried Mitya. “I put itaside because I was vile, that is, because I was calculating, and to becalculating in such a case is vile ... and that vileness has been going ona whole month.”
“It’s incomprehensible.”
“I wonder at you. But I’ll make it clearer. Perhaps it really isincomprehensible. You see, attend to what I say. I appropriate threethousand entrusted to my honor, I spend it on a spree, say I spend it all,and next morning I go to her and say, ‘Katya, I’ve done wrong, I’vesquandered your three thousand,’ well, is that right? No, it’s notright—it’s dishonest and cowardly, I’m a beast, with no more self‐controlthan a beast, that’s so, isn’t it? But still I’m not a thief? Not adownright thief, you’ll admit! I squandered it, but I didn’t steal it. Nowa second, rather more favorable alternative: follow me carefully, or I mayget confused again—my head’s going round—and so, for the secondalternative: I spend here only fifteen hundred out of the three thousand,that is, only half. Next day I go and take that half to her: ‘Katya, takethis fifteen hundred from me, I’m a low beast, and an untrustworthyscoundrel, for I’ve wasted half the money, and I shall waste this, too, sokeep me from temptation!’ Well, what of that alternative? I should be abeast and a scoundrel, and whatever you like; but not a thief, notaltogether a thief, or I should not have brought back what was left, buthave kept that, too. She would see at once that since I brought back half,I should pay back what I’d spent, that I should never give up trying to,that I should work to get it and pay it back. So in that case I should bea scoundrel, but not a thief, you may say what you like, not a thief!”
“I admit that there is a certain distinction,” said the prosecutor, with acold smile. “But it’s strange that you see such a vital difference.”
“Yes, I see a vital difference! Every man may be a scoundrel, and perhapsevery man is a scoundrel, but not every one can be a thief, it takes anarch‐scoundrel to be that. Oh, of course, I don’t know how to make thesefine distinctions ... but a thief is lower than a scoundrel, that’s myconviction. Listen, I carry the money about me a whole month, I may makeup my mind to give it back to‐morrow, and I’m a scoundrel no longer, but Icannot make up my mind, you see, though I’m making up my mind every day,and every day spurring myself on to do it, and yet for a whole month Ican’t bring myself to it, you see. Is that right to your thinking, is thatright?”
“Certainly, that’s not right, that I can quite understand, and that Idon’t dispute,” answered the prosecutor with reserve. “And let us give upall discussion of these subtleties and distinctions, and, if you will beso kind, get back to the point. And the point is, that you have still nottold us, altogether we’ve asked you, why, in the first place, you halvedthe money, squandering one half and hiding the other? For what purposeexactly did you hide it, what did you mean to do with that fifteenhundred? I insist upon that question, Dmitri Fyodorovitch.”
“Yes, of course!” cried Mitya, striking himself on the forehead; “forgiveme, I’m worrying you, and am not explaining the chief point, or you’dunderstand in a minute, for it’s just the motive of it that’s thedisgrace! You see, it was all to do with the old man, my dead father. Hewas always pestering Agrafena Alexandrovna, and I was jealous; I thoughtthen that she was hesitating between me and him. So I kept thinking everyday, suppose she were to make up her mind all of a sudden, suppose shewere to leave off tormenting me, and were suddenly to say to me, ‘I loveyou, not him; take me to the other end of the world.’ And I’d only fortycopecks; how could I take her away, what could I do? Why, I’d be lost. Yousee, I didn’t know her then, I didn’t understand her, I thought she wantedmoney, and that she wouldn’t forgive my poverty. And so I fiendishlycounted out the half of that three thousand, sewed it up, calculating onit, sewed it up before I was drunk, and after I had sewn it up, I went offto get drunk on the rest. Yes, that was base. Do you understand now?”
Both the lawyers laughed aloud.
“I should have called it sensible and moral on your part not to havesquandered it all,” chuckled Nikolay Parfenovitch, “for after all whatdoes it amount to?”
“Why, that I stole it, that’s what it amounts to! Oh, God, you horrify meby not understanding! Every day that I had that fifteen hundred sewn upround my neck, every day and every hour I said to myself, ‘You’re a thief!you’re a thief!’ Yes, that’s why I’ve been so savage all this month,that’s why I fought in the tavern, that’s why I attacked my father, it wasbecause I felt I was a thief. I couldn’t make up my mind, I didn’t dareeven to tell Alyosha, my brother, about that fifteen hundred: I felt I wassuch a scoundrel and such a pickpocket. But, do you know, while I carriedit I said to myself at the same time every hour: ‘No, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,you may yet not be a thief.’ Why? Because I might go next day and pay backthat fifteen hundred to Katya. And only yesterday I made up my mind totear my amulet off my neck, on my way from Fenya’s to Perhotin. I hadn’tbeen able till that moment to bring myself to it. And it was only when Itore it off that I became a downright thief, a thief and a dishonest manfor the rest of my life. Why? Because, with that I destroyed, too, mydream of going to Katya and saying, ‘I’m a scoundrel, but not a thief!’ Doyou understand now? Do you understand?”
“What was it made you decide to do it yesterday?” Nikolay Parfenovitchinterrupted.
“Why? It’s absurd to ask. Because I had condemned myself to die at fiveo’clock this morning, here, at dawn. I thought it made no differencewhether I died a thief or a man of honor. But I see it’s not so, it turnsout that it does make a difference. Believe me, gentlemen, what hastortured me most during this night has not been the thought that I’dkilled the old servant, and that I was in danger of Siberia just when mylove was being rewarded, and Heaven was open to me again. Oh, that didtorture me, but not in the same way: not so much as the damnedconsciousness that I had torn that damned money off my breast at last andspent it, and had become a downright thief! Oh, gentlemen, I tell youagain, with a bleeding heart, I have learnt a great deal this night. Ihave learnt that it’s not only impossible to live a scoundrel, butimpossible to die a scoundrel.... No, gentlemen, one must die honest....”
Mitya was pale. His face had a haggard and exhausted look, in spite of hisbeing intensely excited.
“I am beginning to understand you, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,” the prosecutorsaid slowly, in a soft and almost compassionate tone. “But all this, ifyou’ll excuse my saying so, is a matter of nerves, in my opinion ... youroverwrought nerves, that’s what it is. And why, for instance, should younot have saved yourself such misery for almost a month, by going andreturning that fifteen hundred to the lady who had entrusted it to you?And why could you not have explained things to her, and in view of yourposition, which you describe as being so awful, why could you not have hadrecourse to the plan which would so naturally have occurred to one’s mind,that is, after honorably confessing your errors to her, why could you nothave asked her to lend you the sum needed for your expenses, which, withher generous heart, she would certainly not have refused you in yourdistress, especially if it had been with some guarantee, or even on thesecurity you offered to the merchant Samsonov, and to Madame Hohlakov? Isuppose you still regard that security as of value?”
Mitya suddenly crimsoned.
“Surely you don’t think me such an out and out scoundrel as that? Youcan’t be speaking in earnest?” he said, with indignation, looking theprosecutor straight in the face, and seeming unable to believe his ears.
“I assure you I’m in earnest.... Why do you imagine I’m not serious?” Itwas the prosecutor’s turn to be surprised.
“Oh, how base that would have been! Gentlemen, do you know, you aretorturing me! Let me tell you everything, so be it. I’ll confess all myinfernal wickedness, but to put you to shame, and you’ll be surprisedyourselves at the depth of ignominy to which a medley of human passionscan sink. You must know that I already had that plan myself, that plan youspoke of, just now, prosecutor! Yes, gentlemen, I, too, have had thatthought in my mind all this current month, so that I was on the point ofdeciding to go to Katya—I was mean enough for that. But to go to her, totell her of my treachery, and for that very treachery, to carry it out,for the expenses of that treachery, to beg for money from her, Katya (tobeg, do you hear, to beg), and go straight from her to run away with theother, the rival, who hated and insulted her—to think of it! You must bemad, prosecutor!”
“Mad I am not, but I did speak in haste, without thinking ... of thatfeminine jealousy ... if there could be jealousy in this case, as youassert ... yes, perhaps there is something of the kind,” said theprosecutor, smiling.
“But that would have been so infamous!” Mitya brought his fist down on thetable fiercely. “That would have been filthy beyond everything! Yes, doyou know that she might have given me that money, yes, and she would havegiven it, too; she’d have been certain to give it, to be revenged on me,she’d have given it to satisfy her vengeance, to show her contempt for me,for hers is an infernal nature, too, and she’s a woman of great wrath. I’dhave taken the money, too, oh, I should have taken it; I should have takenit, and then, for the rest of my life ... oh, God! Forgive me, gentlemen,I’m making such an outcry because I’ve had that thought in my mind solately, only the day before yesterday, that night when I was having allthat bother with Lyagavy, and afterwards yesterday, all day yesterday, Iremember, till that happened ...”
“Till what happened?” put in Nikolay Parfenovitch inquisitively, but Mityadid not hear it.
“I have made you an awful confession,” Mitya said gloomily in conclusion.“You must appreciate it, and what’s more, you must respect it, for if not,if that leaves your souls untouched, then you’ve simply no respect for me,gentlemen, I tell you that, and I shall die of shame at having confessedit to men like you! Oh, I shall shoot myself! Yes, I see, I see alreadythat you don’t believe me. What, you want to write that down, too?” hecried in dismay.
“Yes, what you said just now,” said Nikolay Parfenovitch, looking at himin surprise, “that is, that up to the last hour you were stillcontemplating going to Katerina Ivanovna to beg that sum from her.... Iassure you, that’s a very important piece of evidence for us, DmitriFyodorovitch, I mean for the whole case ... and particularly for you,particularly important for you.”
“Have mercy, gentlemen!” Mitya flung up his hands. “Don’t write that,anyway; have some shame. Here I’ve torn my heart asunder before you, andyou seize the opportunity and are fingering the wounds in both halves....Oh, my God!”
In despair he hid his face in his hands.
“Don’t worry yourself so, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,” observed the prosecutor,“everything that is written down will be read over to you afterwards, andwhat you don’t agree to we’ll alter as you like. But now I’ll ask you onelittle question for the second time. Has no one, absolutely no one, heardfrom you of that money you sewed up? That, I must tell you, is almostimpossible to believe.”
“No one, no one, I told you so before, or you’ve not understood anything!Let me alone!”
“Very well, this matter is bound to be explained, and there’s plenty oftime for it, but meantime, consider; we have perhaps a dozen witnessesthat you yourself spread it abroad, and even shouted almost everywhereabout the three thousand you’d spent here; three thousand, not fifteenhundred. And now, too, when you got hold of the money you had yesterday,you gave many people to understand that you had brought three thousandwith you.”
“You’ve got not dozens, but hundreds of witnesses, two hundred witnesses,two hundred have heard it, thousands have heard it!” cried Mitya.
“Well, you see, all bear witness to it. And the word _all_ meanssomething.”
“It means nothing. I talked rot, and every one began repeating it.”
“But what need had you to ‘talk rot,’ as you call it?”
“The devil knows. From bravado perhaps ... at having wasted so muchmoney.... To try and forget that money I had sewn up, perhaps ... yes,that was why ... damn it ... how often will you ask me that question?Well, I told a fib, and that was the end of it, once I’d said it, I didn’tcare to correct it. What does a man tell lies for sometimes?”
“That’s very difficult to decide, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, what makes a mantell lies,” observed the prosecutor impressively. “Tell me, though, wasthat ‘amulet,’ as you call it, on your neck, a big thing?”
“No, not big.”
“How big, for instance?”
“If you fold a hundred‐rouble note in half, that would be the size.”
“You’d better show us the remains of it. You must have them somewhere.”
“Damnation, what nonsense! I don’t know where they are.”
“But excuse me: where and when did you take it off your neck? According toyour own evidence you didn’t go home.”
“When I was going from Fenya’s to Perhotin’s, on the way I tore it off myneck and took out the money.”
“In the dark?”
“What should I want a light for? I did it with my fingers in one minute.”
“Without scissors, in the street?”
“In the market‐place I think it was. Why scissors? It was an old rag. Itwas torn in a minute.”
“Where did you put it afterwards?”
“I dropped it there.”
“Where was it, exactly?”
“In the market‐place, in the market‐place! The devil knows whereabouts.What do you want to know for?”
“That’s extremely important, Dmitri Fyodorovitch. It would be materialevidence in your favor. How is it you don’t understand that? Who helpedyou to sew it up a month ago?”
“No one helped me. I did it myself.”
“Can you sew?”
“A soldier has to know how to sew. No knowledge was needed to do that.”
“Where did you get the material, that is, the rag in which you sewed themoney?”
“Are you laughing at me?”
“Not at all. And we are in no mood for laughing, Dmitri Fyodorovitch.”
“I don’t know where I got the rag from—somewhere, I suppose.”
“I should have thought you couldn’t have forgotten it?”
“Upon my word, I don’t remember. I might have torn a bit off my linen.”
“That’s very interesting. We might find in your lodgings to‐morrow theshirt or whatever it is from which you tore the rag. What sort of rag wasit, cloth or linen?”
“Goodness only knows what it was. Wait a bit.... I believe I didn’t tearit off anything. It was a bit of calico.... I believe I sewed it up in acap of my landlady’s.”
“In your landlady’s cap?”
“Yes. I took it from her.”
“How did you get it?”
“You see, I remember once taking a cap for a rag, perhaps to wipe my penon. I took it without asking, because it was a worthless rag. I tore itup, and I took the notes and sewed them up in it. I believe it was in thatvery rag I sewed them. An old piece of calico, washed a thousand times.”
“And you remember that for certain now?”
“I don’t know whether for certain. I think it was in the cap. But, hangit, what does it matter?”
“In that case your landlady will remember that the thing was lost?”
“No, she won’t, she didn’t miss it. It was an old rag, I tell you, an oldrag not worth a farthing.”
“And where did you get the needle and thread?”
“I’ll stop now. I won’t say any more. Enough of it!” said Mitya, losinghis temper at last.
“It’s strange that you should have so completely forgotten where you threwthe pieces in the market‐place.”
“Give orders for the market‐place to be swept to‐morrow, and perhapsyou’ll find it,” said Mitya, sneering. “Enough, gentlemen, enough!” hedecided, in an exhausted voice. “I see you don’t believe me! Not for amoment! It’s my fault, not yours. I ought not to have been so ready. Why,why did I degrade myself by confessing my secret to you? It’s a joke toyou. I see that from your eyes. You led me on to it, prosecutor? Sing ahymn of triumph if you can.... Damn you, you torturers!”
He bent his head, and hid his face in his hands. The lawyers were silent.A minute later he raised his head and looked at them almost vacantly. Hisface now expressed complete, hopeless despair, and he sat mute and passiveas though hardly conscious of what was happening. In the meantime they hadto finish what they were about. They had immediately to begin examiningthe witnesses. It was by now eight o’clock in the morning. The lights hadbeen extinguished long ago. Mihail Makarovitch and Kalganov, who had beencontinually in and out of the room all the while the interrogation hadbeen going on, had now both gone out again. The lawyers, too, looked verytired. It was a wretched morning, the whole sky was overcast, and the rainstreamed down in bucketfuls. Mitya gazed blankly out of the window.
“May I look out of the window?” he asked Nikolay Parfenovitch, suddenly.
“Oh, as much as you like,” the latter replied.
Mitya got up and went to the window.... The rain lashed against its littlegreenish panes. He could see the muddy road just below the house, andfarther away, in the rain and mist, a row of poor, black, dismal huts,looking even blacker and poorer in the rain. Mitya thought of “Phœbus thegolden‐haired,” and how he had meant to shoot himself at his first ray.“Perhaps it would be even better on a morning like this,” he thought witha smile, and suddenly, flinging his hand downwards, he turned to his“torturers.”
“Gentlemen,” he cried, “I see that I am lost! But she? Tell me about her,I beseech you. Surely she need not be ruined with me? She’s innocent, youknow, she was out of her mind when she cried last night ‘It’s all myfault!’ She’s done nothing, nothing! I’ve been grieving over her all nightas I sat with you.... Can’t you, won’t you tell me what you are going todo with her now?”
“You can set your mind quite at rest on that score, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,”the prosecutor answered at once, with evident alacrity. “We have, so far,no grounds for interfering with the lady in whom you are so interested. Itrust that it may be the same in the later development of the case.... Onthe contrary, we’ll do everything that lies in our power in that matter.Set your mind completely at rest.”
“Gentlemen, I thank you. I knew that you were honest, straight‐forwardpeople in spite of everything. You’ve taken a load off my heart.... Well,what are we to do now? I’m ready.”
“Well, we ought to make haste. We must pass to examining the witnesseswithout delay. That must be done in your presence and therefore—”
“Shouldn’t we have some tea first?” interposed Nikolay Parfenovitch, “Ithink we’ve deserved it!”
They decided that if tea were ready downstairs (Mihail Makarovitch had, nodoubt, gone down to get some) they would have a glass and then “go on andon,” putting off their proper breakfast until a more favorableopportunity. Tea really was ready below, and was soon brought up. Mitya atfirst refused the glass that Nikolay Parfenovitch politely offered him,but afterwards he asked for it himself and drank it greedily. He lookedsurprisingly exhausted. It might have been supposed from his Herculeanstrength that one night of carousing, even accompanied by the most violentemotions, could have had little effect on him. But he felt that he couldhardly hold his head up, and from time to time all the objects about himseemed heaving and dancing before his eyes. “A little more and I shallbegin raving,” he said to himself.


Chapter VIII. The Evidence Of The Witnesses. The Babe

The examination of the witnesses began. But we will not continue our storyin such detail as before. And so we will not dwell on how NikolayParfenovitch impressed on every witness called that he must give hisevidence in accordance with truth and conscience, and that he wouldafterwards have to repeat his evidence on oath, how every witness wascalled upon to sign the protocol of his evidence, and so on. We will onlynote that the point principally insisted upon in the examination was thequestion of the three thousand roubles, that is, was the sum spent here,at Mokroe, by Mitya on the first occasion, a month before, three thousandor fifteen hundred? And again had he spent three thousand or fifteenhundred yesterday? Alas, all the evidence given by every one turned out tobe against Mitya. There was not one in his favor, and some witnessesintroduced new, almost crushing facts, in contradiction of his, Mitya’s,story.
The first witness examined was Trifon Borissovitch. He was not in theleast abashed as he stood before the lawyers. He had, on the contrary, anair of stern and severe indignation with the accused, which gave him anappearance of truthfulness and personal dignity. He spoke little, and withreserve, waited to be questioned, answered precisely and deliberately.Firmly and unhesitatingly he bore witness that the sum spent a monthbefore could not have been less than three thousand, that all the peasantsabout here would testify that they had heard the sum of three thousandmentioned by Dmitri Fyodorovitch himself. “What a lot of money he flungaway on the gypsy girls alone! He wasted a thousand, I daresay, on themalone.”
“I don’t believe I gave them five hundred,” was Mitya’s gloomy comment onthis. “It’s a pity I didn’t count the money at the time, but I wasdrunk....”
Mitya was sitting sideways with his back to the curtains. He listenedgloomily, with a melancholy and exhausted air, as though he would say:
“Oh, say what you like. It makes no difference now.”
“More than a thousand went on them, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,” retorted TrifonBorissovitch firmly. “You flung it about at random and they picked it up.They were a rascally, thievish lot, horse‐stealers, they’ve been drivenaway from here, or maybe they’d bear witness themselves how much they gotfrom you. I saw the sum in your hands, myself—count it I didn’t, youdidn’t let me, that’s true enough—but by the look of it I should say itwas far more than fifteen hundred ... fifteen hundred, indeed! We’ve seenmoney too. We can judge of amounts....”
As for the sum spent yesterday he asserted that Dmitri Fyodorovitch hadtold him, as soon as he arrived, that he had brought three thousand withhim.
“Come now, is that so, Trifon Borissovitch?” replied Mitya. “Surely Ididn’t declare so positively that I’d brought three thousand?”
“You did say so, Dmitri Fyodorovitch. You said it before Andrey. Andreyhimself is still here. Send for him. And in the hall, when you weretreating the chorus, you shouted straight out that you would leave yoursixth thousand here—that is with what you spent before, we mustunderstand. Stepan and Semyon heard it, and Pyotr Fomitch Kalganov, too,was standing beside you at the time. Maybe he’d remember it....”
The evidence as to the “sixth” thousand made an extraordinary impressionon the two lawyers. They were delighted with this new mode of reckoning;three and three made six, three thousand then and three now made six, thatwas clear.
They questioned all the peasants suggested by Trifon Borissovitch, Stepanand Semyon, the driver Andrey, and Kalganov. The peasants and the driverunhesitatingly confirmed Trifon Borissovitch’s evidence. They noted down,with particular care, Andrey’s account of the conversation he had had withMitya on the road: “ ‘Where,’ says he, ‘am I, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, going,to heaven or to hell, and shall I be forgiven in the next world or not?’ ”
The psychological Ippolit Kirillovitch heard this with a subtle smile, andended by recommending that these remarks as to where Dmitri Fyodorovitchwould go should be “included in the case.”
Kalganov, when called, came in reluctantly, frowning and ill‐humored, andhe spoke to the lawyers as though he had never met them before in hislife, though they were acquaintances whom he had been meeting every dayfor a long time past. He began by saying that “he knew nothing about itand didn’t want to.” But it appeared that he had heard of the “sixth”thousand, and he admitted that he had been standing close by at themoment. As far as he could see he “didn’t know” how much money Mitya hadin his hands. He affirmed that the Poles had cheated at cards. In reply toreiterated questions he stated that, after the Poles had been turned out,Mitya’s position with Agrafena Alexandrovna had certainly improved, andthat she had said that she loved him. He spoke of Agrafena Alexandrovnawith reserve and respect, as though she had been a lady of the bestsociety, and did not once allow himself to call her Grushenka. In spite ofthe young man’s obvious repugnance at giving evidence, IppolitKirillovitch examined him at great length, and only from him learnt allthe details of what made up Mitya’s “romance,” so to say, on that night.Mitya did not once pull Kalganov up. At last they let the young man go,and he left the room with unconcealed indignation.
The Poles, too, were examined. Though they had gone to bed in their room,they had not slept all night, and on the arrival of the police officersthey hastily dressed and got ready, realizing that they would certainly besent for. They gave their evidence with dignity, though not without someuneasiness. The little Pole turned out to be a retired official of thetwelfth class, who had served in Siberia as a veterinary surgeon. His namewas Mussyalovitch. Pan Vrublevsky turned out to be an uncertificateddentist. Although Nikolay Parfenovitch asked them questions on enteringthe room they both addressed their answers to Mihail Makarovitch, who wasstanding on one side, taking him in their ignorance for the most importantperson and in command, and addressed him at every word as “Pan Colonel.”Only after several reproofs from Mihail Makarovitch himself, they graspedthat they had to address their answers to Nikolay Parfenovitch only. Itturned out that they could speak Russian quite correctly except for theiraccent in some words. Of his relations with Grushenka, past and present,Pan Mussyalovitch spoke proudly and warmly, so that Mitya was roused atonce and declared that he would not allow the “scoundrel” to speak likethat in his presence! Pan Mussyalovitch at once called attention to theword “scoundrel” and begged that it should be put down in the protocol.Mitya fumed with rage.
“He’s a scoundrel! A scoundrel! You can put that down. And put down, too,that, in spite of the protocol I still declare that he’s a scoundrel!” hecried.
Though Nikolay Parfenovitch did insert this in the protocol, he showed themost praiseworthy tact and management. After sternly reprimanding Mitya,he cut short all further inquiry into the romantic aspect of the case, andhastened to pass to what was essential. One piece of evidence given by thePoles roused special interest in the lawyers: that was how, in that veryroom, Mitya had tried to buy off Pan Mussyalovitch, and had offered himthree thousand roubles to resign his claims, seven hundred roubles down,and the remaining two thousand three hundred “to be paid next day in thetown.” He had sworn at the time that he had not the whole sum with him atMokroe, but that his money was in the town. Mitya observed hotly that hehad not said that he would be sure to pay him the remainder next day inthe town. But Pan Vrublevsky confirmed the statement, and Mitya, afterthinking for a moment admitted, frowning, that it must have been as thePoles stated, that he had been excited at the time, and might indeed havesaid so.
The prosecutor positively pounced on this piece of evidence. It seemed toestablish for the prosecution (and they did, in fact, base this deductionon it) that half, or a part of, the three thousand that had come intoMitya’s hands might really have been left somewhere hidden in the town, oreven, perhaps, somewhere here, in Mokroe. This would explain thecircumstance, so baffling for the prosecution, that only eight hundredroubles were to be found in Mitya’s hands. This circumstance had been theone piece of evidence which, insignificant as it was, had hitherto told,to some extent, in Mitya’s favor. Now this one piece of evidence in hisfavor had broken down. In answer to the prosecutor’s inquiry, where hewould have got the remaining two thousand three hundred roubles, since hehimself had denied having more than fifteen hundred, Mitya confidentlyreplied that he had meant to offer the “little chap,” not money, but aformal deed of conveyance of his rights to the village of Tchermashnya,those rights which he had already offered to Samsonov and Madame Hohlakov.The prosecutor positively smiled at the “innocence of this subterfuge.”
“And you imagine he would have accepted such a deed as a substitute fortwo thousand three hundred roubles in cash?”
“He certainly would have accepted it,” Mitya declared warmly. “Why, lookhere, he might have grabbed not two thousand, but four or six, for it. Hewould have put his lawyers, Poles and Jews, on to the job, and might havegot, not three thousand, but the whole property out of the old man.”
The evidence of Pan Mussyalovitch was, of course, entered in the protocolin the fullest detail. Then they let the Poles go. The incident of thecheating at cards was hardly touched upon. Nikolay Parfenovitch was toowell pleased with them, as it was, and did not want to worry them withtrifles, moreover, it was nothing but a foolish, drunken quarrel overcards. There had been drinking and disorder enough, that night.... So thetwo hundred roubles remained in the pockets of the Poles.
Then old Maximov was summoned. He came in timidly, approached with littlesteps, looking very disheveled and depressed. He had, all this time, takenrefuge below with Grushenka, sitting dumbly beside her, and “now and thenhe’d begin blubbering over her and wiping his eyes with a blue checkhandkerchief,” as Mihail Makarovitch described afterwards. So that sheherself began trying to pacify and comfort him. The old man at onceconfessed that he had done wrong, that he had borrowed “ten roubles in mypoverty,” from Dmitri Fyodorovitch, and that he was ready to pay it back.To Nikolay Parfenovitch’s direct question, had he noticed how much moneyDmitri Fyodorovitch held in his hand, as he must have been able to see thesum better than any one when he took the note from him, Maximov, in themost positive manner, declared that there was twenty thousand.
“Have you ever seen so much as twenty thousand before, then?” inquiredNikolay Parfenovitch, with a smile.
“To be sure I have, not twenty, but seven, when my wife mortgaged mylittle property. She’d only let me look at it from a distance, boasting ofit to me. It was a very thick bundle, all rainbow‐colored notes. AndDmitri Fyodorovitch’s were all rainbow‐colored....”
He was not kept long. At last it was Grushenka’s turn. NikolayParfenovitch was obviously apprehensive of the effect her appearance mighthave on Mitya, and he muttered a few words of admonition to him, but Mityabowed his head in silence, giving him to understand “that he would notmake a scene.” Mihail Makarovitch himself led Grushenka in. She enteredwith a stern and gloomy face, that looked almost composed and sat downquietly on the chair offered her by Nikolay Parfenovitch. She was verypale, she seemed to be cold, and wrapped herself closely in hermagnificent black shawl. She was suffering from a slight feverishchill—the first symptom of the long illness which followed that night. Hergrave air, her direct earnest look and quiet manner made a very favorableimpression on every one. Nikolay Parfenovitch was even a little bit“fascinated.” He admitted himself, when talking about it afterwards, thatonly then had he seen “how handsome the woman was,” for, though he hadseen her several times before, he had always looked upon her as somethingof a “provincial hetaira.” “She has the manners of the best society,” hesaid enthusiastically, gossiping about her in a circle of ladies. But thiswas received with positive indignation by the ladies, who immediatelycalled him a “naughty man,” to his great satisfaction.
As she entered the room, Grushenka only glanced for an instant at Mitya,who looked at her uneasily. But her face reassured him at once. After thefirst inevitable inquiries and warnings, Nikolay Parfenovitch asked her,hesitating a little, but preserving the most courteous manner, on whatterms she was with the retired lieutenant, Dmitri Fyodorovitch Karamazov.To this Grushenka firmly and quietly replied:
“He was an acquaintance. He came to see me as an acquaintance during thelast month.” To further inquisitive questions she answered plainly andwith complete frankness, that, though “at times” she had thought himattractive, she had not loved him, but had won his heart as well as hisold father’s “in my nasty spite,” that she had seen that Mitya was veryjealous of Fyodor Pavlovitch and every one else; but that had only amusedher. She had never meant to go to Fyodor Pavlovitch, she had simply beenlaughing at him. “I had no thoughts for either of them all this lastmonth. I was expecting another man who had wronged me. But I think,” shesaid in conclusion, “that there’s no need for you to inquire about that,nor for me to answer you, for that’s my own affair.”
Nikolay Parfenovitch immediately acted upon this hint. He again dismissedthe “romantic” aspect of the case and passed to the serious one, that is,to the question of most importance, concerning the three thousand roubles.Grushenka confirmed the statement that three thousand roubles hadcertainly been spent on the first carousal at Mokroe, and, though she hadnot counted the money herself, she had heard that it was three thousandfrom Dmitri Fyodorovitch’s own lips.
“Did he tell you that alone, or before some one else, or did you only hearhim speak of it to others in your presence?” the prosecutor inquiredimmediately.
To which Grushenka replied that she had heard him say so before otherpeople, and had heard him say so when they were alone.
“Did he say it to you alone once, or several times?” inquired theprosecutor, and learned that he had told Grushenka so several times.
Ippolit Kirillovitch was very well satisfied with this piece of evidence.Further examination elicited that Grushenka knew, too, where that moneyhad come from, and that Dmitri Fyodorovitch had got it from KaterinaIvanovna.
“And did you never, once, hear that the money spent a month ago was notthree thousand, but less, and that Dmitri Fyodorovitch had saved half thatsum for his own use?”
“No, I never heard that,” answered Grushenka.
It was explained further that Mitya had, on the contrary, often told herthat he hadn’t a farthing.
“He was always expecting to get some from his father,” said Grushenka inconclusion.
“Did he never say before you ... casually, or in a moment of irritation,”Nikolay Parfenovitch put in suddenly, “that he intended to make an attempton his father’s life?”
“Ach, he did say so,” sighed Grushenka.
“Once or several times?”
“He mentioned it several times, always in anger.”
“And did you believe he would do it?”
“No, I never believed it,” she answered firmly. “I had faith in his nobleheart.”
“Gentlemen, allow me,” cried Mitya suddenly, “allow me to say one word toAgrafena Alexandrovna, in your presence.”
“You can speak,” Nikolay Parfenovitch assented.
“Agrafena Alexandrovna!” Mitya got up from his chair, “have faith in Godand in me. I am not guilty of my father’s murder!”
Having uttered these words Mitya sat down again on his chair. Grushenkastood up and crossed herself devoutly before the ikon. “Thanks be to Thee,O Lord,” she said, in a voice thrilled with emotion, and still standing,she turned to Nikolay Parfenovitch and added:
“As he has spoken now, believe it! I know him. He’ll say anything as ajoke or from obstinacy, but he’ll never deceive you against hisconscience. He’s telling the whole truth, you may believe it.”
“Thanks, Agrafena Alexandrovna, you’ve given me fresh courage,” Mityaresponded in a quivering voice.
As to the money spent the previous day, she declared that she did not knowwhat sum it was, but had heard him tell several people that he had threethousand with him. And to the question where he got the money, she saidthat he had told her that he had “stolen” it from Katerina Ivanovna, andthat she had replied to that that he hadn’t stolen it, and that he mustpay the money back next day. On the prosecutor’s asking her emphaticallywhether the money he said he had stolen from Katerina Ivanovna was what hehad spent yesterday, or what he had squandered here a month ago, shedeclared that he meant the money spent a month ago, and that that was howshe understood him.
Grushenka was at last released, and Nikolay Parfenovitch informed herimpulsively that she might at once return to the town and that if he couldbe of any assistance to her, with horses for example, or if she would carefor an escort, he ... would be—
“I thank you sincerely,” said Grushenka, bowing to him, “I’m going withthis old gentleman, I am driving him back to town with me, and meanwhile,if you’ll allow me, I’ll wait below to hear what you decide about DmitriFyodorovitch.”
She went out. Mitya was calm, and even looked more cheerful, but only fora moment. He felt more and more oppressed by a strange physical weakness.His eyes were closing with fatigue. The examination of the witnesses was,at last, over. They proceeded to a final revision of the protocol. Mityagot up, moved from his chair to the corner by the curtain, lay down on alarge chest covered with a rug, and instantly fell asleep.
He had a strange dream, utterly out of keeping with the place and thetime.
He was driving somewhere in the steppes, where he had been stationed longago, and a peasant was driving him in a cart with a pair of horses,through snow and sleet. He was cold, it was early in November, and thesnow was falling in big wet flakes, melting as soon as it touched theearth. And the peasant drove him smartly, he had a fair, long beard. Hewas not an old man, somewhere about fifty, and he had on a gray peasant’ssmock. Not far off was a village, he could see the black huts, and halfthe huts were burnt down, there were only the charred beams sticking up.And as they drove in, there were peasant women drawn up along the road, alot of women, a whole row, all thin and wan, with their faces a sort ofbrownish color, especially one at the edge, a tall, bony woman, who lookedforty, but might have been only twenty, with a long thin face. And in herarms was a little baby crying. And her breasts seemed so dried up thatthere was not a drop of milk in them. And the child cried and cried, andheld out its little bare arms, with its little fists blue from cold.
“Why are they crying? Why are they crying?” Mitya asked, as they dashedgayly by.
“It’s the babe,” answered the driver, “the babe weeping.”
And Mitya was struck by his saying, in his peasant way, “the babe,” and heliked the peasant’s calling it a “babe.” There seemed more pity in it.
“But why is it weeping?” Mitya persisted stupidly, “why are its littlearms bare? Why don’t they wrap it up?”
“The babe’s cold, its little clothes are frozen and don’t warm it.”
“But why is it? Why?” foolish Mitya still persisted.
“Why, they’re poor people, burnt out. They’ve no bread. They’re beggingbecause they’ve been burnt out.”
“No, no,” Mitya, as it were, still did not understand. “Tell me why it isthose poor mothers stand there? Why are people poor? Why is the babe poor?Why is the steppe barren? Why don’t they hug each other and kiss? Whydon’t they sing songs of joy? Why are they so dark from black misery? Whydon’t they feed the babe?”
And he felt that, though his questions were unreasonable and senseless,yet he wanted to ask just that, and he had to ask it just in that way. Andhe felt that a passion of pity, such as he had never known before, wasrising in his heart, that he wanted to cry, that he wanted to do somethingfor them all, so that the babe should weep no more, so that the dark‐faced, dried‐up mother should not weep, that no one should shed tearsagain from that moment, and he wanted to do it at once, at once,regardless of all obstacles, with all the recklessness of the Karamazovs.
“And I’m coming with you. I won’t leave you now for the rest of my life,I’m coming with you,” he heard close beside him Grushenka’s tender voice,thrilling with emotion. And his heart glowed, and he struggled forwardtowards the light, and he longed to live, to live, to go on and on,towards the new, beckoning light, and to hasten, hasten, now, at once!
“What! Where?” he exclaimed opening his eyes, and sitting up on the chest,as though he had revived from a swoon, smiling brightly. NikolayParfenovitch was standing over him, suggesting that he should hear theprotocol read aloud and sign it. Mitya guessed that he had been asleep anhour or more, but he did not hear Nikolay Parfenovitch. He was suddenlystruck by the fact that there was a pillow under his head, which hadn’tbeen there when he had leant back, exhausted, on the chest.
“Who put that pillow under my head? Who was so kind?” he cried, with asort of ecstatic gratitude, and tears in his voice, as though some greatkindness had been shown him.
He never found out who this kind man was; perhaps one of the peasantwitnesses, or Nikolay Parfenovitch’s little secretary, had compassionatelythought to put a pillow under his head; but his whole soul was quiveringwith tears. He went to the table and said that he would sign whatever theyliked.
“I’ve had a good dream, gentlemen,” he said in a strange voice, with a newlight, as of joy, in his face.


Chapter IX. They Carry Mitya Away

When the protocol had been signed, Nikolay Parfenovitch turned solemnly tothe prisoner and read him the “Committal,” setting forth, that in such ayear, on such a day, in such a place, the investigating lawyer of such‐and‐such a district court, having examined so‐and‐so (to wit, Mitya)accused of this and of that (all the charges were carefully written out)and having considered that the accused, not pleading guilty to the chargesmade against him, had brought forward nothing in his defense, while thewitnesses, so‐and‐so, and so‐and‐so, and the circumstances such‐and‐suchtestify against him, acting in accordance with such‐and‐such articles ofthe Statute Book, and so on, has ruled, that, in order to preclude so‐and‐so (Mitya) from all means of evading pursuit and judgment he be detainedin such‐and‐such a prison, which he hereby notifies to the accused andcommunicates a copy of this same “Committal” to the deputy prosecutor, andso on, and so on.
In brief, Mitya was informed that he was, from that moment, a prisoner,and that he would be driven at once to the town, and there shut up in avery unpleasant place. Mitya listened attentively, and only shrugged hisshoulders.
“Well, gentlemen, I don’t blame you. I’m ready.... I understand thatthere’s nothing else for you to do.”
Nikolay Parfenovitch informed him gently that he would be escorted at onceby the rural police officer, Mavriky Mavrikyevitch, who happened to be onthe spot....
“Stay,” Mitya interrupted, suddenly, and impelled by uncontrollablefeeling he pronounced, addressing all in the room:
“Gentlemen, we’re all cruel, we’re all monsters, we all make men weep, andmothers, and babes at the breast, but of all, let it be settled here, now,of all I am the lowest reptile! I’ve sworn to amend, and every day I’vedone the same filthy things. I understand now that such men as I need ablow, a blow of destiny to catch them as with a noose, and bind them by aforce from without. Never, never should I have risen of myself! But thethunderbolt has fallen. I accept the torture of accusation, and my publicshame, I want to suffer and by suffering I shall be purified. Perhaps Ishall be purified, gentlemen? But listen, for the last time, I am notguilty of my father’s blood. I accept my punishment, not because I killedhim, but because I meant to kill him, and perhaps I really might havekilled him. Still I mean to fight it out with you. I warn you of that.I’ll fight it out with you to the end, and then God will decide. Good‐by,gentlemen, don’t be vexed with me for having shouted at you during theexamination. Oh, I was still such a fool then.... In another minute Ishall be a prisoner, but now, for the last time, as a free man, DmitriKaramazov offers you his hand. Saying good‐by to you, I say it to allmen.”
His voice quivered and he stretched out his hand, but NikolayParfenovitch, who happened to stand nearest to him, with a sudden, almostnervous movement, hid his hands behind his back. Mitya instantly noticedthis, and started. He let his outstretched hand fall at once.
“The preliminary inquiry is not yet over,” Nikolay Parfenovitch faltered,somewhat embarrassed. “We will continue it in the town, and I, for mypart, of course, am ready to wish you all success ... in your defense....As a matter of fact, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, I’ve always been disposed toregard you as, so to speak, more unfortunate than guilty. All of us here,if I may make bold to speak for all, we are all ready to recognize thatyou are, at bottom, a young man of honor, but, alas, one who has beencarried away by certain passions to a somewhat excessive degree....”
Nikolay Parfenovitch’s little figure was positively majestic by the timehe had finished speaking. It struck Mitya that in another minute this“boy” would take his arm, lead him to another corner, and renew theirconversation about “girls.” But many quite irrelevant and inappropriatethoughts sometimes occur even to a prisoner when he is being led out toexecution.
“Gentlemen, you are good, you are humane, may I see _her_ to say ‘good‐by’for the last time?” asked Mitya.
“Certainly, but considering ... in fact, now it’s impossible except in thepresence of—”
“Oh, well, if it must be so, it must!”
Grushenka was brought in, but the farewell was brief, and of few words,and did not at all satisfy Nikolay Parfenovitch. Grushenka made a deep bowto Mitya.
“I have told you I am yours, and I will be yours. I will follow you forever, wherever they may send you. Farewell; you are guiltless, thoughyou’ve been your own undoing.”
Her lips quivered, tears flowed from her eyes.
“Forgive me, Grusha, for my love, for ruining you, too, with my love.”
Mitya would have said something more, but he broke off and went out. Hewas at once surrounded by men who kept a constant watch on him. At thebottom of the steps to which he had driven up with such a dash the daybefore with Andrey’s three horses, two carts stood in readiness. MavrikyMavrikyevitch, a sturdy, thick‐set man with a wrinkled face, was annoyedabout something, some sudden irregularity. He was shouting angrily. Heasked Mitya to get into the cart with somewhat excessive surliness.
“When I stood him drinks in the tavern, the man had quite a differentface,” thought Mitya, as he got in. At the gates there was a crowd ofpeople, peasants, women and drivers. Trifon Borissovitch came down thesteps too. All stared at Mitya.
“Forgive me at parting, good people!” Mitya shouted suddenly from thecart.
“Forgive us too!” he heard two or three voices.
“Good‐by to you, too, Trifon Borissovitch!”
But Trifon Borissovitch did not even turn round. He was, perhaps, toobusy. He, too, was shouting and fussing about something. It appeared thateverything was not yet ready in the second cart, in which two constableswere to accompany Mavriky Mavrikyevitch. The peasant who had been orderedto drive the second cart was pulling on his smock, stoutly maintainingthat it was not his turn to go, but Akim’s. But Akim was not to be seen.They ran to look for him. The peasant persisted and besought them to wait.
“You see what our peasants are, Mavriky Mavrikyevitch. They’ve no shame!”exclaimed Trifon Borissovitch. “Akim gave you twenty‐five copecks the daybefore yesterday. You’ve drunk it all and now you cry out. I’m simplysurprised at your good‐nature, with our low peasants, MavrikyMavrikyevitch, that’s all I can say.”
“But what do we want a second cart for?” Mitya put in. “Let’s start withthe one, Mavriky Mavrikyevitch. I won’t be unruly, I won’t run away fromyou, old fellow. What do we want an escort for?”
“I’ll trouble you, sir, to learn how to speak to me if you’ve never beentaught. I’m not ‘old fellow’ to you, and you can keep your advice foranother time!” Mavriky Mavrikyevitch snapped out savagely, as though gladto vent his wrath.
Mitya was reduced to silence. He flushed all over. A moment later he feltsuddenly very cold. The rain had ceased, but the dull sky was stillovercast with clouds, and a keen wind was blowing straight in his face.
“I’ve taken a chill,” thought Mitya, twitching his shoulders.
At last Mavriky Mavrikyevitch, too, got into the cart, sat down heavily,and, as though without noticing it, squeezed Mitya into the corner. It istrue that he was out of humor and greatly disliked the task that had beenlaid upon him.
“Good‐by, Trifon Borissovitch!” Mitya shouted again, and felt himself,that he had not called out this time from good‐nature, but involuntarily,from resentment.
But Trifon Borissovitch stood proudly, with both hands behind his back,and staring straight at Mitya with a stern and angry face, he made noreply.
“Good‐by, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, good‐by!” he heard all at once the voice ofKalganov, who had suddenly darted out. Running up to the cart he held outhis hand to Mitya. He had no cap on.
Mitya had time to seize and press his hand.
“Good‐by, dear fellow! I shan’t forget your generosity,” he cried warmly.
But the cart moved and their hands parted. The bell began ringing andMitya was driven off.
Kalganov ran back, sat down in a corner, bent his head, hid his face inhis hands, and burst out crying. For a long while he sat like that, cryingas though he were a little boy instead of a young man of twenty. Oh, hebelieved almost without doubt in Mitya’s guilt.
“What are these people? What can men be after this?” he exclaimedincoherently, in bitter despondency, almost despair. At that moment he hadno desire to live.
“Is it worth it? Is it worth it?” exclaimed the boy in his grief.




PART IV



Book X. The Boys


Chapter I. Kolya Krassotkin

It was the beginning of November. There had been a hard frost, elevendegrees Réaumur, without snow, but a little dry snow had fallen on thefrozen ground during the night, and a keen dry wind was lifting andblowing it along the dreary streets of our town, especially about themarket‐place. It was a dull morning, but the snow had ceased.
Not far from the market‐place, close to Plotnikov’s shop, there stood asmall house, very clean both without and within. It belonged to MadameKrassotkin, the widow of a former provincial secretary, who had been deadfor fourteen years. His widow, still a nice‐looking woman of thirty‐two,was living in her neat little house on her private means. She lived inrespectable seclusion; she was of a soft but fairly cheerful disposition.She was about eighteen at the time of her husband’s death; she had beenmarried only a year and had just borne him a son. From the day of hisdeath she had devoted herself heart and soul to the bringing up of herprecious treasure, her boy Kolya. Though she had loved him passionatelythose fourteen years, he had caused her far more suffering than happiness.She had been trembling and fainting with terror almost every day, afraidhe would fall ill, would catch cold, do something naughty, climb on achair and fall off it, and so on and so on. When Kolya began going toschool, the mother devoted herself to studying all the sciences with himso as to help him, and go through his lessons with him. She hastened tomake the acquaintance of the teachers and their wives, even made up toKolya’s schoolfellows, and fawned upon them in the hope of thus savingKolya from being teased, laughed at, or beaten by them. She went so farthat the boys actually began to mock at him on her account and taunt himwith being a “mother’s darling.”
But the boy could take his own part. He was a resolute boy, “tremendouslystrong,” as was rumored in his class, and soon proved to be the fact; hewas agile, strong‐willed, and of an audacious and enterprising temper. Hewas good at lessons, and there was a rumor in the school that he couldbeat the teacher, Dardanelov, at arithmetic and universal history. Thoughhe looked down upon every one, he was a good comrade and not supercilious.He accepted his schoolfellows’ respect as his due, but was friendly withthem. Above all, he knew where to draw the line. He could restrain himselfon occasion, and in his relations with the teachers he never oversteppedthat last mystic limit beyond which a prank becomes an unpardonable breachof discipline. But he was as fond of mischief on every possible occasionas the smallest boy in the school, and not so much for the sake ofmischief as for creating a sensation, inventing something, somethingeffective and conspicuous. He was extremely vain. He knew how to make evenhis mother give way to him; he was almost despotic in his control of her.She gave way to him, oh, she had given way to him for years. The onethought unendurable to her was that her boy had no great love for her. Shewas always fancying that Kolya was “unfeeling” to her, and at times,dissolving into hysterical tears, she used to reproach him with hiscoldness. The boy disliked this, and the more demonstrations of feelingwere demanded of him the more he seemed intentionally to avoid them. Yetit was not intentional on his part but instinctive—it was his character.His mother was mistaken; he was very fond of her. He only disliked“sheepish sentimentality,” as he expressed it in his schoolboy language.
There was a bookcase in the house containing a few books that had been hisfather’s. Kolya was fond of reading, and had read several of them byhimself. His mother did not mind that and only wondered sometimes atseeing the boy stand for hours by the bookcase poring over a book insteadof going to play. And in that way Kolya read some things unsuitable forhis age.
Though the boy, as a rule, knew where to draw the line in his mischief, hehad of late begun to play pranks that caused his mother serious alarm. Itis true there was nothing vicious in what he did, but a wild madrecklessness.
It happened that July, during the summer holidays, that the mother and sonwent to another district, forty‐five miles away, to spend a week with adistant relation, whose husband was an official at the railway station(the very station, the nearest one to our town, from which a month laterIvan Fyodorovitch Karamazov set off for Moscow). There Kolya began bycarefully investigating every detail connected with the railways, knowingthat he could impress his schoolfellows when he got home with his newlyacquired knowledge. But there happened to be some other boys in the placewith whom he soon made friends. Some of them were living at the station,others in the neighborhood; there were six or seven of them, all betweentwelve and fifteen, and two of them came from our town. The boys playedtogether, and on the fourth or fifth day of Kolya’s stay at the station, amad bet was made by the foolish boys. Kolya, who was almost the youngestof the party and rather looked down upon by the others in consequence, wasmoved by vanity or by reckless bravado to bet them two roubles that hewould lie down between the rails at night when the eleven o’clock trainwas due, and would lie there without moving while the train rolled overhim at full speed. It is true they made a preliminary investigation, fromwhich it appeared that it was possible to lie so flat between the railsthat the train could pass over without touching, but to lie there was nojoke! Kolya maintained stoutly that he would. At first they laughed athim, called him a little liar, a braggart, but that only egged him on.What piqued him most was that these boys of fifteen turned up their nosesat him too superciliously, and were at first disposed to treat him as “asmall boy,” not fit to associate with them, and that was an unendurableinsult.
And so it was resolved to go in the evening, half a mile from the station,so that the train might have time to get up full speed after leaving thestation. The boys assembled. It was a pitch‐dark night without a moon. Atthe time fixed, Kolya lay down between the rails. The five others who hadtaken the bet waited among the bushes below the embankment, their heartsbeating with suspense, which was followed by alarm and remorse. At lastthey heard in the distance the rumble of the train leaving the station.Two red lights gleamed out of the darkness; the monster roared as itapproached.
“Run, run away from the rails,” the boys cried to Kolya from the bushes,breathless with terror. But it was too late: the train darted up and flewpast. The boys rushed to Kolya. He lay without moving. They began pullingat him, lifting him up. He suddenly got up and walked away without a word.Then he explained that he had lain there as though he were insensible tofrighten them, but the fact was that he really had lost consciousness, ashe confessed long after to his mother. In this way his reputation as “adesperate character,” was established for ever. He returned home to thestation as white as a sheet. Next day he had a slight attack of nervousfever, but he was in high spirits and well pleased with himself. Theincident did not become known at once, but when they came back to the townit penetrated to the school and even reached the ears of the masters. Butthen Kolya’s mother hastened to entreat the masters on her boy’s behalf,and in the end Dardanelov, a respected and influential teacher, exertedhimself in his favor, and the affair was ignored.
Dardanelov was a middle‐aged bachelor, who had been passionately in lovewith Madame Krassotkin for many years past, and had once already, about ayear previously, ventured, trembling with fear and the delicacy of hissentiments, to offer her most respectfully his hand in marriage. But sherefused him resolutely, feeling that to accept him would be an act oftreachery to her son, though Dardanelov had, to judge from certainmysterious symptoms, reason for believing that he was not an object ofaversion to the charming but too chaste and tender‐hearted widow. Kolya’smad prank seemed to have broken the ice, and Dardanelov was rewarded forhis intercession by a suggestion of hope. The suggestion, it is true, wasa faint one, but then Dardanelov was such a paragon of purity and delicacythat it was enough for the time being to make him perfectly happy. He wasfond of the boy, though he would have felt it beneath him to try and winhim over, and was severe and strict with him in class. Kolya, too, kepthim at a respectful distance. He learned his lessons perfectly; he wassecond in his class, was reserved with Dardanelov, and the whole classfirmly believed that Kolya was so good at universal history that he could“beat” even Dardanelov. Kolya did indeed ask him the question, “Whofounded Troy?” to which Dardanelov had made a very vague reply, referringto the movements and migrations of races, to the remoteness of the period,to the mythical legends. But the question, “Who had founded Troy?” thatis, what individuals, he could not answer, and even for some reasonregarded the question as idle and frivolous. But the boys remainedconvinced that Dardanelov did not know who founded Troy. Kolya had read ofthe founders of Troy in Smaragdov, whose history was among the books inhis father’s bookcase. In the end all the boys became interested in thequestion, who it was that had founded Troy, but Krassotkin would not tellhis secret, and his reputation for knowledge remained unshaken.
After the incident on the railway a certain change came over Kolya’sattitude to his mother. When Anna Fyodorovna (Madame Krassotkin) heard ofher son’s exploit, she almost went out of her mind with horror. She hadsuch terrible attacks of hysterics, lasting with intervals for severaldays, that Kolya, seriously alarmed at last, promised on his honor thatsuch pranks should never be repeated. He swore on his knees before theholy image, and swore by the memory of his father, at Madame Krassotkin’sinstance, and the “manly” Kolya burst into tears like a boy of six. Andall that day the mother and son were constantly rushing into each other’sarms sobbing. Next day Kolya woke up as “unfeeling” as before, but he hadbecome more silent, more modest, sterner, and more thoughtful.
Six weeks later, it is true, he got into another scrape, which evenbrought his name to the ears of our Justice of the Peace, but it was ascrape of quite another kind, amusing, foolish, and he did not, as itturned out, take the leading part in it, but was only implicated in it.But of this later. His mother still fretted and trembled, but the moreuneasy she became, the greater were the hopes of Dardanelov. It must benoted that Kolya understood and divined what was in Dardanelov’s heartand, of course, despised him profoundly for his “feelings”; he had in thepast been so tactless as to show this contempt before his mother, hintingvaguely that he knew what Dardanelov was after. But from the time of therailway incident his behavior in this respect also was changed; he did notallow himself the remotest allusion to the subject and began to speak morerespectfully of Dardanelov before his mother, which the sensitive woman atonce appreciated with boundless gratitude. But at the slightest mention ofDardanelov by a visitor in Kolya’s presence, she would flush as pink as arose. At such moments Kolya would either stare out of the window scowling,or would investigate the state of his boots, or would shout angrily for“Perezvon,” the big, shaggy, mangy dog, which he had picked up a monthbefore, brought home, and kept for some reason secretly indoors, notshowing him to any of his schoolfellows. He bullied him frightfully,teaching him all sorts of tricks, so that the poor dog howled for himwhenever he was absent at school, and when he came in, whined withdelight, rushed about as if he were crazy, begged, lay down on the groundpretending to be dead, and so on; in fact, showed all the tricks he hadtaught him, not at the word of command, but simply from the zeal of hisexcited and grateful heart.
I have forgotten, by the way, to mention that Kolya Krassotkin was the boystabbed with a penknife by the boy already known to the reader as the sonof Captain Snegiryov. Ilusha had been defending his father when theschoolboys jeered at him, shouting the nickname “wisp of tow.”


Chapter II. Children

And so on that frosty, snowy, and windy day in November, Kolya Krassotkinwas sitting at home. It was Sunday and there was no school. It had juststruck eleven, and he particularly wanted to go out “on very urgentbusiness,” but he was left alone in charge of the house, for it sohappened that all its elder inmates were absent owing to a sudden andsingular event. Madame Krassotkin had let two little rooms, separated fromthe rest of the house by a passage, to a doctor’s wife with her two smallchildren. This lady was the same age as Anna Fyodorovna, and a greatfriend of hers. Her husband, the doctor, had taken his departure twelvemonths before, going first to Orenburg and then to Tashkend, and for thelast six months she had not heard a word from him. Had it not been for herfriendship with Madame Krassotkin, which was some consolation to theforsaken lady, she would certainly have completely dissolved away intears. And now, to add to her misfortunes, Katerina, her only servant, wassuddenly moved the evening before to announce, to her mistress’samazement, that she proposed to bring a child into the world beforemorning. It seemed almost miraculous to every one that no one had noticedthe probability of it before. The astounded doctor’s wife decided to moveKaterina while there was still time to an establishment in the town keptby a midwife for such emergencies. As she set great store by her servant,she promptly carried out this plan and remained there looking after her.By the morning all Madame Krassotkin’s friendly sympathy and energy werecalled upon to render assistance and appeal to some one for help in thecase.
So both the ladies were absent from home, the Krassotkins’ servant,Agafya, had gone out to the market, and Kolya was thus left for a time toprotect and look after “the kids,” that is, the son and daughter of thedoctor’s wife, who were left alone. Kolya was not afraid of taking care ofthe house, besides he had Perezvon, who had been told to lie flat, withoutmoving, under the bench in the hall. Every time Kolya, walking to and frothrough the rooms, came into the hall, the dog shook his head and gave twoloud and insinuating taps on the floor with his tail, but alas! thewhistle did not sound to release him. Kolya looked sternly at the lucklessdog, who relapsed again into obedient rigidity. The one thing thattroubled Kolya was “the kids.” He looked, of course, with the utmost scornon Katerina’s unexpected adventure, but he was very fond of the bereaved“kiddies,” and had already taken them a picture‐book. Nastya, the elder, agirl of eight, could read, and Kostya, the boy, aged seven, was very fondof being read to by her. Krassotkin could, of course, have provided morediverting entertainment for them. He could have made them stand side byside and played soldiers with them, or sent them hiding all over thehouse. He had done so more than once before and was not above doing it, somuch so that a report once spread at school that Krassotkin played horseswith the little lodgers at home, prancing with his head on one side like atrace‐horse. But Krassotkin haughtily parried this thrust, pointing outthat to play horses with boys of one’s own age, boys of thirteen, wouldcertainly be disgraceful “at this date,” but that he did it for the sakeof “the kids” because he liked them, and no one had a right to call him toaccount for his feelings. The two “kids” adored him.
But on this occasion he was in no mood for games. He had very importantbusiness of his own before him, something almost mysterious. Meanwhiletime was passing and Agafya, with whom he could have left the children,would not come back from market. He had several times already crossed thepassage, opened the door of the lodgers’ room and looked anxiously at “thekids” who were sitting over the book, as he had bidden them. Every time heopened the door they grinned at him, hoping he would come in and would dosomething delightful and amusing. But Kolya was bothered and did not goin.
At last it struck eleven and he made up his mind, once for all, that ifthat “damned” Agafya did not come back within ten minutes he should go outwithout waiting for her, making “the kids” promise, of course, to be bravewhen he was away, not to be naughty, not to cry from fright. With thisidea he put on his wadded winter overcoat with its catskin fur collar,slung his satchel round his shoulder, and, regardless of his mother’sconstantly reiterated entreaties that he would always put on goloshes insuch cold weather, he looked at them contemptuously as he crossed the halland went out with only his boots on. Perezvon, seeing him in his outdoorclothes, began tapping nervously, yet vigorously, on the floor with histail. Twitching all over, he even uttered a plaintive whine. But Kolya,seeing his dog’s passionate excitement, decided that it was a breach ofdiscipline, kept him for another minute under the bench, and only when hehad opened the door into the passage, whistled for him. The dog leapt uplike a mad creature and rushed bounding before him rapturously.
Kolya opened the door to peep at “the kids.” They were both sitting asbefore at the table, not reading but warmly disputing about something. Thechildren often argued together about various exciting problems of life,and Nastya, being the elder, always got the best of it. If Kostya did notagree with her, he almost always appealed to Kolya Krassotkin, and hisverdict was regarded as infallible by both of them. This time the “kids’”discussion rather interested Krassotkin, and he stood still in the passageto listen. The children saw he was listening and that made them disputewith even greater energy.
“I shall never, never believe,” Nastya prattled, “that the old women findbabies among the cabbages in the kitchen‐garden. It’s winter now and thereare no cabbages, and so the old woman couldn’t have taken Katerina adaughter.”
Kolya whistled to himself.
“Or perhaps they do bring babies from somewhere, but only to those who aremarried.”
Kostya stared at Nastya and listened, pondering profoundly.
“Nastya, how silly you are!” he said at last, firmly and calmly. “How canKaterina have a baby when she isn’t married?”
Nastya was exasperated.
“You know nothing about it,” she snapped irritably. “Perhaps she has ahusband, only he is in prison, so now she’s got a baby.”
“But is her husband in prison?” the matter‐of‐fact Kostya inquiredgravely.
“Or, I tell you what,” Nastya interrupted impulsively, completelyrejecting and forgetting her first hypothesis. “She hasn’t a husband, youare right there, but she wants to be married, and so she’s been thinkingof getting married, and thinking and thinking of it till now she’s got it,that is, not a husband but a baby.”
“Well, perhaps so,” Kostya agreed, entirely vanquished. “But you didn’tsay so before. So how could I tell?”
“Come, kiddies,” said Kolya, stepping into the room. “You’re terriblepeople, I see.”
“And Perezvon with you!” grinned Kostya, and began snapping his fingersand calling Perezvon.
“I am in a difficulty, kids,” Krassotkin began solemnly, “and you musthelp me. Agafya must have broken her leg, since she has not turned up tillnow, that’s certain. I must go out. Will you let me go?”
The children looked anxiously at one another. Their smiling faces showedsigns of uneasiness, but they did not yet fully grasp what was expected ofthem.
“You won’t be naughty while I am gone? You won’t climb on the cupboard andbreak your legs? You won’t be frightened alone and cry?”
A look of profound despondency came into the children’s faces.
“And I could show you something as a reward, a little copper cannon whichcan be fired with real gunpowder.”
The children’s faces instantly brightened. “Show us the cannon,” saidKostya, beaming all over.
Krassotkin put his hand in his satchel, and pulling out a little bronzecannon stood it on the table.
“Ah, you are bound to ask that! Look, it’s on wheels.” He rolled the toyon along the table. “And it can be fired off, too. It can be loaded withshot and fired off.”
“And it could kill any one?”
“It can kill any one; you’ve only got to aim at anybody,” and Krassotkinexplained where the powder had to be put, where the shot should be rolledin, showing a tiny hole like a touch‐hole, and told them that it kickedwhen it was fired.
The children listened with intense interest. What particularly strucktheir imagination was that the cannon kicked.
“And have you got any powder?” Nastya inquired.
“Yes.”
“Show us the powder, too,” she drawled with a smile of entreaty.
Krassotkin dived again into his satchel and pulled out a small flaskcontaining a little real gunpowder. He had some shot, too, in a screw ofpaper. He even uncorked the flask and shook a little powder into the palmof his hand.
“One has to be careful there’s no fire about, or it would blow up and killus all,” Krassotkin warned them sensationally.
The children gazed at the powder with an awe‐stricken alarm that onlyintensified their enjoyment. But Kostya liked the shot better.
“And does the shot burn?” he inquired.
“No, it doesn’t.”
“Give me a little shot,” he asked in an imploring voice.
“I’ll give you a little shot; here, take it, but don’t show it to yourmother till I come back, or she’ll be sure to think it’s gunpowder, andwill die of fright and give you a thrashing.”
“Mother never does whip us,” Nastya observed at once.
“I know, I only said it to finish the sentence. And don’t you ever deceiveyour mother except just this once, until I come back. And so, kiddies, canI go out? You won’t be frightened and cry when I’m gone?”
“We sha—all cry,” drawled Kostya, on the verge of tears already.
“We shall cry, we shall be sure to cry,” Nastya chimed in with timidhaste.
“Oh, children, children, how fraught with peril are your years! There’s nohelp for it, chickens, I shall have to stay with you I don’t know howlong. And time is passing, time is passing, oogh!”
“Tell Perezvon to pretend to be dead!” Kostya begged.
“There’s no help for it, we must have recourse to Perezvon. _Ici_,Perezvon.” And Kolya began giving orders to the dog, who performed all histricks.
He was a rough‐haired dog, of medium size, with a coat of a sort of lilac‐gray color. He was blind in his right eye, and his left ear was torn. Hewhined and jumped, stood and walked on his hind legs, lay on his back withhis paws in the air, rigid as though he were dead. While this lastperformance was going on, the door opened and Agafya, Madame Krassotkin’sservant, a stout woman of forty, marked with small‐pox, appeared in thedoorway. She had come back from market and had a bag full of provisions inher hand. Holding up the bag of provisions in her left hand she stoodstill to watch the dog. Though Kolya had been so anxious for her return,he did not cut short the performance, and after keeping Perezvon dead forthe usual time, at last he whistled to him. The dog jumped up and beganbounding about in his joy at having done his duty.
“Only think, a dog!” Agafya observed sententiously.
“Why are you late, female?” asked Krassotkin sternly.
“Female, indeed! Go on with you, you brat.”
“Brat?”
“Yes, a brat. What is it to you if I’m late; if I’m late, you may be sureI have good reason,” muttered Agafya, busying herself about the stove,without a trace of anger or displeasure in her voice. She seemed quitepleased, in fact, to enjoy a skirmish with her merry young master.
“Listen, you frivolous young woman,” Krassotkin began, getting up from thesofa, “can you swear by all you hold sacred in the world and somethingelse besides, that you will watch vigilantly over the kids in my absence?I am going out.”
“And what am I going to swear for?” laughed Agafya. “I shall look afterthem without that.”
“No, you must swear on your eternal salvation. Else I shan’t go.”
“Well, don’t then. What does it matter to me? It’s cold out; stay athome.”
“Kids,” Kolya turned to the children, “this woman will stay with you tillI come back or till your mother comes, for she ought to have been backlong ago. She will give you some lunch, too. You’ll give them something,Agafya, won’t you?”
“That I can do.”
“Good‐by, chickens, I go with my heart at rest. And you, granny,” he addedgravely, in an undertone, as he passed Agafya, “I hope you’ll spare theirtender years and not tell them any of your old woman’s nonsense aboutKaterina. _Ici_, Perezvon!”
“Get along with you!” retorted Agafya, really angry this time. “Ridiculousboy! You want a whipping for saying such things, that’s what you want!”


Chapter III. The Schoolboy

But Kolya did not hear her. At last he could go out. As he went out at thegate he looked round him, shrugged up his shoulders, and saying “It isfreezing,” went straight along the street and turned off to the righttowards the market‐place. When he reached the last house but one beforethe market‐place he stopped at the gate, pulled a whistle out of hispocket, and whistled with all his might as though giving a signal. He hadnot to wait more than a minute before a rosy‐cheeked boy of about eleven,wearing a warm, neat and even stylish coat, darted out to meet him. Thiswas Smurov, a boy in the preparatory class (two classes below KolyaKrassotkin), son of a well‐to‐do official. Apparently he was forbidden byhis parents to associate with Krassotkin, who was well known to be adesperately naughty boy, so Smurov was obviously slipping out on the sly.He was—if the reader has not forgotten—one of the group of boys who twomonths before had thrown stones at Ilusha. He was the one who told AlyoshaKaramazov about Ilusha.
“I’ve been waiting for you for the last hour, Krassotkin,” said Smurovstolidly, and the boys strode towards the market‐place.
“I am late,” answered Krassotkin. “I was detained by circumstances. Youwon’t be thrashed for coming with me?”
“Come, I say, I’m never thrashed! And you’ve got Perezvon with you?”
“Yes.”
“You’re taking him, too?”
“Yes.”
“Ah! if it were only Zhutchka!”
“That’s impossible. Zhutchka’s non‐existent. Zhutchka is lost in the mistsof obscurity.”
“Ah! couldn’t we do this?” Smurov suddenly stood still. “You see Ilushasays that Zhutchka was a shaggy, grayish, smoky‐looking dog like Perezvon.Couldn’t you tell him this is Zhutchka, and he might believe you?”
“Boy, shun a lie, that’s one thing; even with a good object—that’sanother. Above all, I hope you’ve not told them anything about my coming.”
“Heaven forbid! I know what I am about. But you won’t comfort him withPerezvon,” said Smurov, with a sigh. “You know his father, the captain,‘the wisp of tow,’ told us that he was going to bring him a real mastiffpup, with a black nose, to‐day. He thinks that would comfort Ilusha; but Idoubt it.”
“And how is Ilusha?”
“Ah, he is bad, very bad! I believe he’s in consumption: he is quiteconscious, but his breathing! His breathing’s gone wrong. The other day heasked to have his boots on to be led round the room. He tried to walk, buthe couldn’t stand. ‘Ah, I told you before, father,’ he said, ‘that thoseboots were no good. I could never walk properly in them.’ He fancied itwas his boots that made him stagger, but it was simply weakness, really.He won’t live another week. Herzenstube is looking after him. Now they arerich again—they’ve got heaps of money.”
“They are rogues.”
“Who are rogues?”
“Doctors and the whole crew of quacks collectively, and also, of course,individually. I don’t believe in medicine. It’s a useless institution. Imean to go into all that. But what’s that sentimentality you’ve got upthere? The whole class seems to be there every day.”
“Not the whole class: it’s only ten of our fellows who go to see him everyday. There’s nothing in that.”
“What I don’t understand in all this is the part that Alexey Karamazov istaking in it. His brother’s going to be tried to‐morrow or next day forsuch a crime, and yet he has so much time to spend on sentimentality withboys.”
“There’s no sentimentality about it. You are going yourself now to make itup with Ilusha.”
“Make it up with him? What an absurd expression! But I allow no one toanalyze my actions.”
“And how pleased Ilusha will be to see you! He has no idea that you arecoming. Why was it, why was it you wouldn’t come all this time?” Smurovcried with sudden warmth.
“My dear boy, that’s my business, not yours. I am going of myself becauseI choose to, but you’ve all been hauled there by Alexey Karamazov—there’sa difference, you know. And how do you know? I may not be going to make itup at all. It’s a stupid expression.”
“It’s not Karamazov at all; it’s not his doing. Our fellows began goingthere of themselves. Of course, they went with Karamazov at first. Andthere’s been nothing of that sort—no silliness. First one went, and thenanother. His father was awfully pleased to see us. You know he will simplygo out of his mind if Ilusha dies. He sees that Ilusha’s dying. And heseems so glad we’ve made it up with Ilusha. Ilusha asked after you, thatwas all. He just asks and says no more. His father will go out of his mindor hang himself. He behaved like a madman before. You know he is a verydecent man. We made a mistake then. It’s all the fault of that murdererwho beat him then.”
“Karamazov’s a riddle to me all the same. I might have made hisacquaintance long ago, but I like to have a proper pride in some cases.Besides, I have a theory about him which I must work out and verify.”
Kolya subsided into dignified silence. Smurov, too, was silent. Smurov, ofcourse, worshiped Krassotkin and never dreamed of putting himself on alevel with him. Now he was tremendously interested at Kolya’s saying thathe was “going of himself” to see Ilusha. He felt that there must be somemystery in Kolya’s suddenly taking it into his head to go to him that day.They crossed the market‐place, in which at that hour were many loadedwagons from the country and a great number of live fowls. The market womenwere selling rolls, cottons and threads, etc., in their booths. TheseSunday markets were naïvely called “fairs” in the town, and there weremany such fairs in the year.
Perezvon ran about in the wildest spirits, sniffing about first one side,then the other. When he met other dogs they zealously smelt each otherover according to the rules of canine etiquette.
“I like to watch such realistic scenes, Smurov,” said Kolya suddenly.“Have you noticed how dogs sniff at one another when they meet? It seemsto be a law of their nature.”
“Yes; it’s a funny habit.”
“No, it’s not funny; you are wrong there. There’s nothing funny in nature,however funny it may seem to man with his prejudices. If dogs could reasonand criticize us they’d be sure to find just as much that would be funnyto them, if not far more, in the social relations of men, theirmasters—far more, indeed. I repeat that, because I am convinced that thereis far more foolishness among us. That’s Rakitin’s idea—a remarkable idea.I am a Socialist, Smurov.”
“And what is a Socialist?” asked Smurov.
“That’s when all are equal and all have property in common, there are nomarriages, and every one has any religion and laws he likes best, and allthe rest of it. You are not old enough to understand that yet. It’s cold,though.”
“Yes, twelve degrees of frost. Father looked at the thermometer just now.”
“Have you noticed, Smurov, that in the middle of winter we don’t feel socold even when there are fifteen or eighteen degrees of frost as we donow, in the beginning of winter, when there is a sudden frost of twelvedegrees, especially when there is not much snow. It’s because people arenot used to it. Everything is habit with men, everything even in theirsocial and political relations. Habit is the great motive‐power. What afunny‐looking peasant!”
Kolya pointed to a tall peasant, with a good‐natured countenance in a longsheepskin coat, who was standing by his wagon, clapping together hishands, in their shapeless leather gloves, to warm them. His long fairbeard was all white with frost.
“That peasant’s beard’s frozen,” Kolya cried in a loud provocative voiceas he passed him.
“Lots of people’s beards are frozen,” the peasant replied, calmly andsententiously.
“Don’t provoke him,” observed Smurov.
“It’s all right; he won’t be cross; he’s a nice fellow. Good‐by, Matvey.”
“Good‐by.”
“Is your name Matvey?”
“Yes. Didn’t you know?”
“No, I didn’t. It was a guess.”
“You don’t say so! You are a schoolboy, I suppose?”
“Yes.”
“You get whipped, I expect?”
“Nothing to speak of—sometimes.”
“Does it hurt?”
“Well, yes, it does.”
“Ech, what a life!” The peasant heaved a sigh from the bottom of hisheart.
“Good‐by, Matvey.”
“Good‐by. You are a nice chap, that you are.”
The boys went on.
“That was a nice peasant,” Kolya observed to Smurov. “I like talking tothe peasants, and am always glad to do them justice.”
“Why did you tell a lie, pretending we are thrashed?” asked Smurov.
“I had to say that to please him.”
“How do you mean?”
“You know, Smurov, I don’t like being asked the same thing twice. I likepeople to understand at the first word. Some things can’t be explained.According to a peasant’s notions, schoolboys are whipped, and must bewhipped. What would a schoolboy be if he were not whipped? And if I wereto tell him we are not, he’d be disappointed. But you don’t understandthat. One has to know how to talk to the peasants.”
“Only don’t tease them, please, or you’ll get into another scrape as youdid about that goose.”
“So you’re afraid?”
“Don’t laugh, Kolya. Of course I’m afraid. My father would be awfullycross. I am strictly forbidden to go out with you.”
“Don’t be uneasy, nothing will happen this time. Hallo, Natasha!” heshouted to a market woman in one of the booths.
“Call me Natasha! What next! My name is Marya,” the middle‐aged marketwoman shouted at him.
“I am so glad it’s Marya. Good‐by!”
“Ah, you young rascal! A brat like you to carry on so!”
“I’m in a hurry. I can’t stay now. You shall tell me next Sunday.” Kolyawaved his hand at her, as though she had attacked him and not he her.
“I’ve nothing to tell you next Sunday. You set upon me, you impudent youngmonkey. I didn’t say anything,” bawled Marya. “You want a whipping, that’swhat you want, you saucy jackanapes!”
There was a roar of laughter among the other market women round her.Suddenly a man in a violent rage darted out from the arcade of shops closeby. He was a young man, not a native of the town, with dark, curly hairand a long, pale face, marked with smallpox. He wore a long blue coat anda peaked cap, and looked like a merchant’s clerk. He was in a state ofstupid excitement and brandished his fist at Kolya.
“I know you!” he cried angrily, “I know you!”
Kolya stared at him. He could not recall when he could have had a row withthe man. But he had been in so many rows in the street that he couldhardly remember them all.
“Do you?” he asked sarcastically.
“I know you! I know you!” the man repeated idiotically.
“So much the better for you. Well, it’s time I was going. Good‐by!”
“You are at your saucy pranks again?” cried the man. “You are at yoursaucy pranks again? I know, you are at it again!”
“It’s not your business, brother, if I am at my saucy pranks again,” saidKolya, standing still and scanning him.
“Not my business?”
“No; it’s not your business.”
“Whose then? Whose then? Whose then?”
“It’s Trifon Nikititch’s business, not yours.”
“What Trifon Nikititch?” asked the youth, staring with loutish amazementat Kolya, but still as angry as ever.
Kolya scanned him gravely.
“Have you been to the Church of the Ascension?” he suddenly asked him,with stern emphasis.
“What Church of Ascension? What for? No, I haven’t,” said the young man,somewhat taken aback.
“Do you know Sabaneyev?” Kolya went on even more emphatically and evenmore severely.
“What Sabaneyev? No, I don’t know him.”
“Well then you can go to the devil,” said Kolya, cutting short theconversation; and turning sharply to the right he strode quickly on hisway as though he disdained further conversation with a dolt who did noteven know Sabaneyev.
“Stop, heigh! What Sabaneyev?” the young man recovered from his momentarystupefaction and was as excited as before. “What did he say?” He turned tothe market women with a silly stare.
The women laughed.
“You can never tell what he’s after,” said one of them.
“What Sabaneyev is it he’s talking about?” the young man repeated, stillfurious and brandishing his right arm.
“It must be a Sabaneyev who worked for the Kuzmitchovs, that’s who it mustbe,” one of the women suggested.
The young man stared at her wildly.
“For the Kuzmitchovs?” repeated another woman. “But his name wasn’tTrifon. His name’s Kuzma, not Trifon; but the boy said Trifon Nikititch,so it can’t be the same.”
“His name is not Trifon and not Sabaneyev, it’s Tchizhov,” put in suddenlya third woman, who had hitherto been silent, listening gravely. “AlexeyIvanitch is his name. Tchizhov, Alexey Ivanitch.”
“Not a doubt about it, it’s Tchizhov,” a fourth woman emphaticallyconfirmed the statement.
The bewildered youth gazed from one to another.
“But what did he ask for, what did he ask for, good people?” he criedalmost in desperation. “ ‘Do you know Sabaneyev?’ says he. And who thedevil’s to know who is Sabaneyev?”
“You’re a senseless fellow. I tell you it’s not Sabaneyev, but Tchizhov,Alexey Ivanitch Tchizhov, that’s who it is!” one of the women shouted athim impressively.
“What Tchizhov? Who is he? Tell me, if you know.”
“That tall, sniveling fellow who used to sit in the market in the summer.”
“And what’s your Tchizhov to do with me, good people, eh?”
“How can I tell what he’s to do with you?” put in another. “You ought toknow yourself what you want with him, if you make such a clamor about him.He spoke to you, he did not speak to us, you stupid. Don’t you really knowhim?”
“Know whom?”
“Tchizhov.”
“The devil take Tchizhov and you with him. I’ll give him a hiding, that Iwill. He was laughing at me!”
“Will give Tchizhov a hiding! More likely he will give you one. You are afool, that’s what you are!”
“Not Tchizhov, not Tchizhov, you spiteful, mischievous woman. I’ll givethe boy a hiding. Catch him, catch him, he was laughing at me!”
The woman guffawed. But Kolya was by now a long way off, marching alongwith a triumphant air. Smurov walked beside him, looking round at theshouting group far behind. He too was in high spirits, though he was stillafraid of getting into some scrape in Kolya’s company.
“What Sabaneyev did you mean?” he asked Kolya, foreseeing what his answerwould be.
“How do I know? Now there’ll be a hubbub among them all day. I like tostir up fools in every class of society. There’s another blockhead, thatpeasant there. You know, they say ‘there’s no one stupider than a stupidFrenchman,’ but a stupid Russian shows it in his face just as much. Can’tyou see it all over his face that he is a fool, that peasant, eh?”
“Let him alone, Kolya. Let’s go on.”
“Nothing could stop me, now I am once off. Hey, good morning, peasant!”
A sturdy‐looking peasant, with a round, simple face and grizzled beard,who was walking by, raised his head and looked at the boy. He seemed notquite sober.
“Good morning, if you are not laughing at me,” he said deliberately inreply.
“And if I am?” laughed Kolya.
“Well, a joke’s a joke. Laugh away. I don’t mind. There’s no harm in ajoke.”
“I beg your pardon, brother, it was a joke.”
“Well, God forgive you!”
“Do you forgive me, too?”
“I quite forgive you. Go along.”
“I say, you seem a clever peasant.”
“Cleverer than you,” the peasant answered unexpectedly, with the samegravity.
“I doubt it,” said Kolya, somewhat taken aback.
“It’s true, though.”
“Perhaps it is.”
“It is, brother.”
“Good‐by, peasant!”
“Good‐by!”
“There are all sorts of peasants,” Kolya observed to Smurov after a briefsilence. “How could I tell I had hit on a clever one? I am always ready torecognize intelligence in the peasantry.”
In the distance the cathedral clock struck half‐past eleven. The boys madehaste and they walked as far as Captain Snegiryov’s lodging, aconsiderable distance, quickly and almost in silence. Twenty paces fromthe house Kolya stopped and told Smurov to go on ahead and ask Karamazovto come out to him.
“One must sniff round a bit first,” he observed to Smurov.
“Why ask him to come out?” Smurov protested. “You go in; they will beawfully glad to see you. What’s the sense of making friends in the frostout here?”
“I know why I want to see him out here in the frost,” Kolya cut him shortin the despotic tone he was fond of adopting with “small boys,” and Smurovran to do his bidding.


Chapter IV. The Lost Dog

Kolya leaned against the fence with an air of dignity, waiting for Alyoshato appear. Yes, he had long wanted to meet him. He had heard a great dealabout him from the boys, but hitherto he had always maintained anappearance of disdainful indifference when he was mentioned, and he hadeven “criticized” what he heard about Alyosha. But secretly he had a greatlonging to make his acquaintance; there was something sympathetic andattractive in all he was told about Alyosha. So the present moment wasimportant: to begin with, he had to show himself at his best, to show hisindependence, “Or he’ll think of me as thirteen and take me for a boy,like the rest of them. And what are these boys to him? I shall ask himwhen I get to know him. It’s a pity I am so short, though. Tuzikov isyounger than I am, yet he is half a head taller. But I have a clever face.I am not good‐looking. I know I’m hideous, but I’ve a clever face. Imustn’t talk too freely; if I fall into his arms all at once, he maythink—Tfoo! how horrible if he should think—!”
Such were the thoughts that excited Kolya while he was doing his utmost toassume the most independent air. What distressed him most was his being soshort; he did not mind so much his “hideous” face, as being so short. Onthe wall in a corner at home he had the year before made a pencil‐mark toshow his height, and every two months since he anxiously measured himselfagainst it to see how much he had gained. But alas! he grew very slowly,and this sometimes reduced him almost to despair. His face was in realityby no means “hideous”; on the contrary, it was rather attractive, with afair, pale skin, freckled. His small, lively gray eyes had a fearlesslook, and often glowed with feeling. He had rather high cheekbones; small,very red, but not very thick, lips; his nose was small and unmistakablyturned up. “I’ve a regular pug nose, a regular pug nose,” Kolya used tomutter to himself when he looked in the looking‐glass, and he always leftit with indignation. “But perhaps I haven’t got a clever face?” hesometimes thought, doubtful even of that. But it must not be supposed thathis mind was preoccupied with his face and his height. On the contrary,however bitter the moments before the looking‐glass were to him, hequickly forgot them, and forgot them for a long time, “abandoning himselfentirely to ideas and to real life,” as he formulated it to himself.
Alyosha came out quickly and hastened up to Kolya. Before he reached him,Kolya could see that he looked delighted. “Can he be so glad to see me?”Kolya wondered, feeling pleased. We may note here, in passing, thatAlyosha’s appearance had undergone a complete change since we saw himlast. He had abandoned his cassock and was wearing now a well‐cut coat, asoft, round hat, and his hair had been cropped short. All this was verybecoming to him, and he looked quite handsome. His charming face alwayshad a good‐humored expression; but there was a gentleness and serenity inhis good‐humor. To Kolya’s surprise, Alyosha came out to him just as hewas, without an overcoat. He had evidently come in haste. He held out hishand to Kolya at once.
“Here you are at last! How anxious we’ve been to see you!”
“There were reasons which you shall know directly. Anyway, I am glad tomake your acquaintance. I’ve long been hoping for an opportunity, and haveheard a great deal about you,” Kolya muttered, a little breathless.
“We should have met anyway. I’ve heard a great deal about you, too; butyou’ve been a long time coming here.”
“Tell me, how are things going?”
“Ilusha is very ill. He is certainly dying.”
“How awful! You must admit that medicine is a fraud, Karamazov,” criedKolya warmly.
“Ilusha has mentioned you often, very often, even in his sleep, indelirium, you know. One can see that you used to be very, very dear to him... before the incident ... with the knife.... Then there’s anotherreason.... Tell me, is that your dog?”
“Yes, Perezvon.”
“Not Zhutchka?” Alyosha looked at Kolya with eyes full of pity. “Is shelost for ever?”
“I know you would all like it to be Zhutchka. I’ve heard all about it.”Kolya smiled mysteriously. “Listen, Karamazov, I’ll tell you all about it.That’s what I came for; that’s what I asked you to come out here for, toexplain the whole episode to you before we go in,” he began withanimation. “You see, Karamazov, Ilusha came into the preparatory classlast spring. Well, you know what our preparatory class is—a lot of smallboys. They began teasing Ilusha at once. I am two classes higher up, and,of course, I only look on at them from a distance. I saw the boy was weakand small, but he wouldn’t give in to them; he fought with them. I saw hewas proud, and his eyes were full of fire. I like children like that. Andthey teased him all the more. The worst of it was he was horribly dressedat the time, his breeches were too small for him, and there were holes inhis boots. They worried him about it; they jeered at him. That I can’tstand. I stood up for him at once, and gave it to them hot. I beat them,but they adore me, do you know, Karamazov?” Kolya boasted impulsively;“but I am always fond of children. I’ve two chickens in my hands at homenow—that’s what detained me to‐day. So they left off beating Ilusha and Itook him under my protection. I saw the boy was proud. I tell you that,the boy was proud; but in the end he became slavishly devoted to me: hedid my slightest bidding, obeyed me as though I were God, tried to copyme. In the intervals between the classes he used to run to me at once, andI’d go about with him. On Sundays, too. They always laugh when an olderboy makes friends with a younger one like that; but that’s a prejudice. Ifit’s my fancy, that’s enough. I am teaching him, developing him. Whyshouldn’t I develop him if I like him? Here you, Karamazov, have taken upwith all these nestlings. I see you want to influence the youngergeneration—to develop them, to be of use to them, and I assure you thistrait in your character, which I knew by hearsay, attracted me more thananything. Let us get to the point, though. I noticed that there was a sortof softness and sentimentality coming over the boy, and you know I have apositive hatred of this sheepish sentimentality, and I have had it from ababy. There were contradictions in him, too: he was proud, but he wasslavishly devoted to me, and yet all at once his eyes would flash and he’drefuse to agree with me; he’d argue, fly into a rage. I used sometimes topropound certain ideas; I could see that it was not so much that hedisagreed with the ideas, but that he was simply rebelling against me,because I was cool in responding to his endearments. And so, in order totrain him properly, the tenderer he was, the colder I became. I did it onpurpose: that was my idea. My object was to form his character, to lickhim into shape, to make a man of him ... and besides ... no doubt, youunderstand me at a word. Suddenly I noticed for three days in successionhe was downcast and dejected, not because of my coldness, but forsomething else, something more important. I wondered what the tragedy was.I have pumped him and found out that he had somehow got to knowSmerdyakov, who was footman to your late father—it was before his death,of course—and he taught the little fool a silly trick—that is, a brutal,nasty trick. He told him to take a piece of bread, to stick a pin in it,and throw it to one of those hungry dogs who snap up anything withoutbiting it, and then to watch and see what would happen. So they prepared apiece of bread like that and threw it to Zhutchka, that shaggy dog there’sbeen such a fuss about. The people of the house it belonged to never fedit at all, though it barked all day. (Do you like that stupid barking,Karamazov? I can’t stand it.) So it rushed at the bread, swallowed it, andbegan to squeal; it turned round and round and ran away, squealing as itran out of sight. That was Ilusha’s own account of it. He confessed it tome, and cried bitterly. He hugged me, shaking all over. He kept onrepeating ‘He ran away squealing’: the sight of that haunted him. He wastormented by remorse, I could see that. I took it seriously. I determinedto give him a lesson for other things as well. So I must confess I wasn’tquite straightforward, and pretended to be more indignant perhaps than Iwas. ‘You’ve done a nasty thing,’ I said, ‘you are a scoundrel. I won’ttell of it, of course, but I shall have nothing more to do with you for atime. I’ll think it over and let you know through Smurov’—that’s the boywho’s just come with me; he’s always ready to do anything for me—‘whetherI will have anything to do with you in the future or whether I give you upfor good as a scoundrel.’ He was tremendously upset. I must own I felt I’dgone too far as I spoke, but there was no help for it. I did what Ithought best at the time. A day or two after, I sent Smurov to tell himthat I would not speak to him again. That’s what we call it when twoschoolfellows refuse to have anything more to do with one another.Secretly I only meant to send him to Coventry for a few days and then, ifI saw signs of repentance, to hold out my hand to him again. That was myintention. But what do you think happened? He heard Smurov’s message, hiseyes flashed. ‘Tell Krassotkin from me,’ he cried, ‘that I will throwbread with pins to all the dogs—all—all of them!’ ‘So he’s going in for alittle temper. We must smoke it out of him.’ And I began to treat him withcontempt; whenever I met him I turned away or smiled sarcastically. Andjust then that affair with his father happened. You remember? You mustrealize that he was fearfully worked up by what had happened already. Theboys, seeing I’d given him up, set on him and taunted him, shouting, ‘Wispof tow, wisp of tow!’ And he had soon regular skirmishes with them, whichI am very sorry for. They seem to have given him one very bad beating. Oneday he flew at them all as they were coming out of school. I stood a fewyards off, looking on. And, I swear, I don’t remember that I laughed; itwas quite the other way, I felt awfully sorry for him, in another minute Iwould have run up to take his part. But he suddenly met my eyes. I don’tknow what he fancied; but he pulled out a penknife, rushed at me, andstruck at my thigh, here in my right leg. I didn’t move. I don’t mindowning I am plucky sometimes, Karamazov. I simply looked at himcontemptuously, as though to say, ‘This is how you repay all my kindness!Do it again, if you like, I’m at your service.’ But he didn’t stab meagain; he broke down, he was frightened at what he had done, he threw awaythe knife, burst out crying, and ran away. I did not sneak on him, ofcourse, and I made them all keep quiet, so it shouldn’t come to the earsof the masters. I didn’t even tell my mother till it had healed up. Andthe wound was a mere scratch. And then I heard that the same day he’d beenthrowing stones and had bitten your finger—but you understand now what astate he was in! Well, it can’t be helped: it was stupid of me not to comeand forgive him—that is, to make it up with him—when he was taken ill. Iam sorry for it now. But I had a special reason. So now I’ve told you allabout it ... but I’m afraid it was stupid of me.”
“Oh, what a pity,” exclaimed Alyosha, with feeling, “that I didn’t knowbefore what terms you were on with him, or I’d have come to you long agoto beg you to go to him with me. Would you believe it, when he wasfeverish he talked about you in delirium. I didn’t know how much you wereto him! And you’ve really not succeeded in finding that dog? His fatherand the boys have been hunting all over the town for it. Would you believeit, since he’s been ill, I’ve three times heard him repeat with tears,‘It’s because I killed Zhutchka, father, that I am ill now. God ispunishing me for it.’ He can’t get that idea out of his head. And if thedog were found and proved to be alive, one might almost fancy the joywould cure him. We have all rested our hopes on you.”
“Tell me, what made you hope that I should be the one to find him?” Kolyaasked, with great curiosity. “Why did you reckon on me rather than any oneelse?”
“There was a report that you were looking for the dog, and that you wouldbring it when you’d found it. Smurov said something of the sort. We’ve allbeen trying to persuade Ilusha that the dog is alive, that it’s been seen.The boys brought him a live hare; he just looked at it, with a faintsmile, and asked them to set it free in the fields. And so we did. Hisfather has just this moment come back, bringing him a mastiff pup, hopingto comfort him with that; but I think it only makes it worse.”
“Tell me, Karamazov, what sort of man is the father? I know him, but whatdo you make of him—a mountebank, a buffoon?”
“Oh, no; there are people of deep feeling who have been somehow crushed.Buffoonery in them is a form of resentful irony against those to whom theydaren’t speak the truth, from having been for years humiliated andintimidated by them. Believe me, Krassotkin, that sort of buffoonery issometimes tragic in the extreme. His whole life now is centered in Ilusha,and if Ilusha dies, he will either go mad with grief or kill himself. Ifeel almost certain of that when I look at him now.”
“I understand you, Karamazov. I see you understand human nature,” Kolyaadded, with feeling.
“And as soon as I saw you with a dog, I thought it was Zhutchka you werebringing.”
“Wait a bit, Karamazov, perhaps we shall find it yet; but this isPerezvon. I’ll let him go in now and perhaps it will amuse Ilusha morethan the mastiff pup. Wait a bit, Karamazov, you will know something in aminute. But, I say, I am keeping you here!” Kolya cried suddenly. “You’veno overcoat on in this bitter cold. You see what an egoist I am. Oh, weare all egoists, Karamazov!”
“Don’t trouble; it is cold, but I don’t often catch cold. Let us go in,though, and, by the way, what is your name? I know you are called Kolya,but what else?”
“Nikolay—Nikolay Ivanovitch Krassotkin, or, as they say in officialdocuments, ‘Krassotkin son.’ ” Kolya laughed for some reason, but addedsuddenly, “Of course I hate my name Nikolay.”
“Why so?”
“It’s so trivial, so ordinary.”
“You are thirteen?” asked Alyosha.
“No, fourteen—that is, I shall be fourteen very soon, in a fortnight. I’llconfess one weakness of mine, Karamazov, just to you, since it’s our firstmeeting, so that you may understand my character at once. I hate beingasked my age, more than that ... and in fact ... there’s a libelous storygoing about me, that last week I played robbers with the preparatory boys.It’s a fact that I did play with them, but it’s a perfect libel to say Idid it for my own amusement. I have reasons for believing that you’veheard the story; but I wasn’t playing for my own amusement, it was for thesake of the children, because they couldn’t think of anything to do bythemselves. But they’ve always got some silly tale. This is an awful townfor gossip, I can tell you.”
“But what if you had been playing for your own amusement, what’s theharm?”
“Come, I say, for my own amusement! You don’t play horses, do you?”
“But you must look at it like this,” said Alyosha, smiling. “Grown‐uppeople go to the theater and there the adventures of all sorts of heroesare represented—sometimes there are robbers and battles, too—and isn’tthat just the same thing, in a different form, of course? And youngpeople’s games of soldiers or robbers in their playtime are also art inits first stage. You know, they spring from the growing artistic instinctsof the young. And sometimes these games are much better than performancesin the theater, the only difference is that people go there to look at theactors, while in these games the young people are the actors themselves.But that’s only natural.”
“You think so? Is that your idea?” Kolya looked at him intently. “Oh, youknow, that’s rather an interesting view. When I go home, I’ll think itover. I’ll admit I thought I might learn something from you. I’ve come tolearn of you, Karamazov,” Kolya concluded, in a voice full of spontaneousfeeling.
“And I of you,” said Alyosha, smiling and pressing his hand.
Kolya was much pleased with Alyosha. What struck him most was that hetreated him exactly like an equal and that he talked to him just as if hewere “quite grown up.”
“I’ll show you something directly, Karamazov; it’s a theatricalperformance, too,” he said, laughing nervously. “That’s why I’ve come.”
“Let us go first to the people of the house, on the left. All the boysleave their coats in there, because the room is small and hot.”
“Oh, I’m only coming in for a minute. I’ll keep on my overcoat. Perezvonwill stay here in the passage and be dead. _Ici_, Perezvon, lie down andbe dead! You see how he’s dead. I’ll go in first and explore, then I’llwhistle to him when I think fit, and you’ll see, he’ll dash in like mad.Only Smurov must not forget to open the door at the moment. I’ll arrangeit all and you’ll see something.”


Chapter V. By Ilusha’s Bedside

The room inhabited by the family of the retired captain Snegiryov isalready familiar to the reader. It was close and crowded at that momentwith a number of visitors. Several boys were sitting with Ilusha, andthough all of them, like Smurov, were prepared to deny that it was Alyoshawho had brought them and reconciled them with Ilusha, it was really thefact. All the art he had used had been to take them, one by one, toIlusha, without “sheepish sentimentality,” appearing to do so casually andwithout design. It was a great consolation to Ilusha in his suffering. Hewas greatly touched by seeing the almost tender affection and sympathyshown him by these boys, who had been his enemies. Krassotkin was the onlyone missing and his absence was a heavy load on Ilusha’s heart. Perhapsthe bitterest of all his bitter memories was his stabbing Krassotkin, whohad been his one friend and protector. Clever little Smurov, who was thefirst to make it up with Ilusha, thought it was so. But when Smurov hintedto Krassotkin that Alyosha wanted to come and see him about something, thelatter cut him short, bidding Smurov tell “Karamazov” at once that he knewbest what to do, that he wanted no one’s advice, and that, if he went tosee Ilusha, he would choose his own time for he had “his own reasons.”
That was a fortnight before this Sunday. That was why Alyosha had not beento see him, as he had meant to. But though he waited, he sent Smurov tohim twice again. Both times Krassotkin met him with a curt, impatientrefusal, sending Alyosha a message not to bother him any more, that if hecame himself, he, Krassotkin, would not go to Ilusha at all. Up to thevery last day, Smurov did not know that Kolya meant to go to Ilusha thatmorning, and only the evening before, as he parted from Smurov, Kolyaabruptly told him to wait at home for him next morning, for he would gowith him to the Snegiryovs’, but warned him on no account to say he wascoming, as he wanted to drop in casually. Smurov obeyed. Smurov’s fancythat Kolya would bring back the lost dog was based on the words Kolya haddropped that “they must be asses not to find the dog, if it was alive.”When Smurov, waiting for an opportunity, timidly hinted at his guess aboutthe dog, Krassotkin flew into a violent rage. “I’m not such an ass as togo hunting about the town for other people’s dogs when I’ve got a dog ofmy own! And how can you imagine a dog could be alive after swallowing apin? Sheepish sentimentality, that’s what it is!”
For the last fortnight Ilusha had not left his little bed under the ikonsin the corner. He had not been to school since the day he met Alyosha andbit his finger. He was taken ill the same day, though for a monthafterwards he was sometimes able to get up and walk about the room andpassage. But latterly he had become so weak that he could not move withouthelp from his father. His father was terribly concerned about him. He evengave up drinking and was almost crazy with terror that his boy would die.And often, especially after leading him round the room on his arm andputting him back to bed, he would run to a dark corner in the passage and,leaning his head against the wall, he would break into paroxysms ofviolent weeping, stifling his sobs that they might not be heard by Ilusha.
Returning to the room, he would usually begin doing something to amuse andcomfort his precious boy; he would tell him stories, funny anecdotes, orwould mimic comic people he had happened to meet, even imitate the howlsand cries of animals. But Ilusha could not bear to see his father foolingand playing the buffoon. Though the boy tried not to show how he dislikedit, he saw with an aching heart that his father was an object of contempt,and he was continually haunted by the memory of the “wisp of tow” and that“terrible day.”
Nina, Ilusha’s gentle, crippled sister, did not like her father’sbuffoonery either (Varvara had been gone for some time past to Petersburgto study at the university). But the half‐imbecile mother was greatlydiverted and laughed heartily when her husband began capering about orperforming something. It was the only way she could be amused; all therest of the time she was grumbling and complaining that now every one hadforgotten her, that no one treated her with respect, that she wasslighted, and so on. But during the last few days she had completelychanged. She began looking constantly at Ilusha’s bed in the corner andseemed lost in thought. She was more silent, quieter, and, if she cried,she cried quietly so as not to be heard. The captain noticed the change inher with mournful perplexity. The boys’ visits at first only angered her,but later on their merry shouts and stories began to divert her, and atlast she liked them so much that, if the boys had given up coming, shewould have felt dreary without them. When the children told some story orplayed a game, she laughed and clapped her hands. She called some of themto her and kissed them. She was particularly fond of Smurov.
As for the captain, the presence in his room of the children, who came tocheer up Ilusha, filled his heart from the first with ecstatic joy. Heeven hoped that Ilusha would now get over his depression, and that thatwould hasten his recovery. In spite of his alarm about Ilusha, he had not,till lately, felt one minute’s doubt of his boy’s ultimate recovery.
He met his little visitors with homage, waited upon them hand and foot; hewas ready to be their horse and even began letting them ride on his back,but Ilusha did not like the game and it was given up. He began buyinglittle things for them, gingerbread and nuts, gave them tea and cut themsandwiches. It must be noted that all this time he had plenty of money. Hehad taken the two hundred roubles from Katerina Ivanovna just as Alyoshahad predicted he would. And afterwards Katerina Ivanovna, learning moreabout their circumstances and Ilusha’s illness, visited them herself, madethe acquaintance of the family, and succeeded in fascinating the half‐imbecile mother. Since then she had been lavish in helping them, and thecaptain, terror‐stricken at the thought that his boy might be dying,forgot his pride and humbly accepted her assistance.
All this time Doctor Herzenstube, who was called in by Katerina Ivanovna,came punctually every other day, but little was gained by his visits andhe dosed the invalid mercilessly. But on that Sunday morning a new doctorwas expected, who had come from Moscow, where he had a great reputation.Katerina Ivanovna had sent for him from Moscow at great expense, notexpressly for Ilusha, but for another object of which more will be said inits place hereafter. But, as he had come, she had asked him to see Ilushaas well, and the captain had been told to expect him. He hadn’t theslightest idea that Kolya Krassotkin was coming, though he had long wishedfor a visit from the boy for whom Ilusha was fretting.
At the moment when Krassotkin opened the door and came into the room, thecaptain and all the boys were round Ilusha’s bed, looking at a tinymastiff pup, which had only been born the day before, though the captainhad bespoken it a week ago to comfort and amuse Ilusha, who was stillfretting over the lost and probably dead Zhutchka. Ilusha, who had heardthree days before that he was to be presented with a puppy, not anordinary puppy, but a pedigree mastiff (a very important point, ofcourse), tried from delicacy of feeling to pretend that he was pleased.But his father and the boys could not help seeing that the puppy onlyserved to recall to his little heart the thought of the unhappy dog he hadkilled. The puppy lay beside him feebly moving and he, smiling sadly,stroked it with his thin, pale, wasted hand. Clearly he liked the puppy,but ... it wasn’t Zhutchka; if he could have had Zhutchka and the puppy,too, then he would have been completely happy.
“Krassotkin!” cried one of the boys suddenly. He was the first to see himcome in.
Krassotkin’s entrance made a general sensation; the boys moved away andstood on each side of the bed, so that he could get a full view of Ilusha.The captain ran eagerly to meet Kolya.
“Please come in ... you are welcome!” he said hurriedly. “Ilusha, Mr.Krassotkin has come to see you!”
But Krassotkin, shaking hands with him hurriedly, instantly showed hiscomplete knowledge of the manners of good society. He turned first to thecaptain’s wife sitting in her arm‐chair, who was very ill‐humored at themoment, and was grumbling that the boys stood between her and Ilusha’s bedand did not let her see the new puppy. With the greatest courtesy he madeher a bow, scraping his foot, and turning to Nina, he made her, as theonly other lady present, a similar bow. This polite behavior made anextremely favorable impression on the deranged lady.
“There, you can see at once he is a young man that has been well broughtup,” she commented aloud, throwing up her hands; “but as for our othervisitors they come in one on the top of another.”
“How do you mean, mamma, one on the top of another, how is that?” mutteredthe captain affectionately, though a little anxious on her account.
“That’s how they ride in. They get on each other’s shoulders in thepassage and prance in like that on a respectable family. Strange sort ofvisitors!”
“But who’s come in like that, mamma?”
“Why, that boy came in riding on that one’s back and this one on thatone’s.”
Kolya was already by Ilusha’s bedside. The sick boy turned visibly paler.He raised himself in the bed and looked intently at Kolya. Kolya had notseen his little friend for two months, and he was overwhelmed at the sightof him. He had never imagined that he would see such a wasted, yellowface, such enormous, feverishly glowing eyes and such thin little hands.He saw, with grieved surprise, Ilusha’s rapid, hard breathing and drylips. He stepped close to him, held out his hand, and almost overwhelmed,he said:
“Well, old man ... how are you?” But his voice failed him, he couldn’tachieve an appearance of ease; his face suddenly twitched and the cornersof his mouth quivered. Ilusha smiled a pitiful little smile, still unableto utter a word. Something moved Kolya to raise his hand and pass it overIlusha’s hair.
“Never mind!” he murmured softly to him to cheer him up, or perhaps notknowing why he said it. For a minute they were silent again.
“Hallo, so you’ve got a new puppy?” Kolya said suddenly, in a most callousvoice.
“Ye—es,” answered Ilusha in a long whisper, gasping for breath.
“A black nose, that means he’ll be fierce, a good house‐dog,” Kolyaobserved gravely and stolidly, as if the only thing he cared about was thepuppy and its black nose. But in reality he still had to do his utmost tocontrol his feelings not to burst out crying like a child, and do what hewould he could not control it. “When it grows up, you’ll have to keep iton the chain, I’m sure.”
“He’ll be a huge dog!” cried one of the boys.
“Of course he will,” “a mastiff,” “large,” “like this,” “as big as acalf,” shouted several voices.
“As big as a calf, as a real calf,” chimed in the captain. “I got one likethat on purpose, one of the fiercest breed, and his parents are huge andvery fierce, they stand as high as this from the floor.... Sit down here,on Ilusha’s bed, or here on the bench. You are welcome, we’ve been hopingto see you a long time.... You were so kind as to come with AlexeyFyodorovitch?”
Krassotkin sat on the edge of the bed, at Ilusha’s feet. Though he hadperhaps prepared a free‐and‐easy opening for the conversation on his way,now he completely lost the thread of it.
“No ... I came with Perezvon. I’ve got a dog now, called Perezvon. ASlavonic name. He’s out there ... if I whistle, he’ll run in. I’ve broughta dog, too,” he said, addressing Ilusha all at once. “Do you rememberZhutchka, old man?” he suddenly fired the question at him.
Ilusha’s little face quivered. He looked with an agonized expression atKolya. Alyosha, standing at the door, frowned and signed to Kolya not tospeak of Zhutchka, but he did not or would not notice.
“Where ... is Zhutchka?” Ilusha asked in a broken voice.
“Oh, well, my boy, your Zhutchka’s lost and done for!”
Ilusha did not speak, but he fixed an intent gaze once more on Kolya.Alyosha, catching Kolya’s eye, signed to him vigorously again, but heturned away his eyes pretending not to have noticed.
“It must have run away and died somewhere. It must have died after a meallike that,” Kolya pronounced pitilessly, though he seemed a littlebreathless. “But I’ve got a dog, Perezvon ... A Slavonic name.... I’vebrought him to show you.”
“I don’t want him!” said Ilusha suddenly.
“No, no, you really must see him ... it will amuse you. I brought him onpurpose.... He’s the same sort of shaggy dog.... You allow me to call inmy dog, madam?” He suddenly addressed Madame Snegiryov, with inexplicableexcitement in his manner.
“I don’t want him, I don’t want him!” cried Ilusha, with a mournful breakin his voice. There was a reproachful light in his eyes.
“You’d better,” the captain started up from the chest by the wall on whichhe had just sat down, “you’d better ... another time,” he muttered, butKolya could not be restrained. He hurriedly shouted to Smurov, “Open thedoor,” and as soon as it was open, he blew his whistle. Perezvon dashedheadlong into the room.
“Jump, Perezvon, beg! Beg!” shouted Kolya, jumping up, and the dog stooderect on its hind‐legs by Ilusha’s bedside. What followed was a surpriseto every one: Ilusha started, lurched violently forward, bent overPerezvon and gazed at him, faint with suspense.
“It’s ... Zhutchka!” he cried suddenly, in a voice breaking with joy andsuffering.
“And who did you think it was?” Krassotkin shouted with all his might, ina ringing, happy voice, and bending down he seized the dog and lifted himup to Ilusha.
“Look, old man, you see, blind of one eye and the left ear is torn, justthe marks you described to me. It was by that I found him. I found himdirectly. He did not belong to any one!” he explained, turning quickly tothe captain, to his wife, to Alyosha and then again to Ilusha. “He used tolive in the Fedotovs’ back‐yard. Though he made his home there, they didnot feed him. He was a stray dog that had run away from the village ... Ifound him.... You see, old man, he couldn’t have swallowed what you gavehim. If he had, he must have died, he must have! So he must have spat itout, since he is alive. You did not see him do it. But the pin pricked histongue, that is why he squealed. He ran away squealing and you thoughthe’d swallowed it. He might well squeal, because the skin of dogs’ mouthsis so tender ... tenderer than in men, much tenderer!” Kolya criedimpetuously, his face glowing and radiant with delight. Ilusha could notspeak. White as a sheet, he gazed open‐mouthed at Kolya, with his greateyes almost starting out of his head. And if Krassotkin, who had nosuspicion of it, had known what a disastrous and fatal effect such amoment might have on the sick child’s health, nothing would have inducedhim to play such a trick on him. But Alyosha was perhaps the only personin the room who realized it. As for the captain he behaved like a smallchild.
“Zhutchka! It’s Zhutchka!” he cried in a blissful voice, “Ilusha, this isZhutchka, your Zhutchka! Mamma, this is Zhutchka!” He was almost weeping.
“And I never guessed!” cried Smurov regretfully. “Bravo, Krassotkin! Isaid he’d find the dog and here he’s found him.”
“Here he’s found him!” another boy repeated gleefully.
“Krassotkin’s a brick!” cried a third voice.
“He’s a brick, he’s a brick!” cried the other boys, and they beganclapping.
“Wait, wait,” Krassotkin did his utmost to shout above them all. “I’lltell you how it happened, that’s the whole point. I found him, I took himhome and hid him at once. I kept him locked up at home and did not showhim to any one till to‐day. Only Smurov has known for the last fortnight,but I assured him this dog was called Perezvon and he did not guess. Andmeanwhile I taught the dog all sorts of tricks. You should only see allthe things he can do! I trained him so as to bring you a well‐trained dog,in good condition, old man, so as to be able to say to you, ‘See, old man,what a fine dog your Zhutchka is now!’ Haven’t you a bit of meat? He’llshow you a trick that will make you die with laughing. A piece of meat,haven’t you got any?”
The captain ran across the passage to the landlady, where their cookingwas done. Not to lose precious time, Kolya, in desperate haste, shouted toPerezvon, “Dead!” And the dog immediately turned round and lay on his backwith its four paws in the air. The boys laughed. Ilusha looked on with thesame suffering smile, but the person most delighted with the dog’sperformance was “mamma.” She laughed at the dog and began snapping herfingers and calling it, “Perezvon, Perezvon!”
“Nothing will make him get up, nothing!” Kolya cried triumphantly, proudof his success. “He won’t move for all the shouting in the world, but if Icall to him, he’ll jump up in a minute. Ici, Perezvon!” The dog leapt upand bounded about, whining with delight. The captain ran back with a pieceof cooked beef.
“Is it hot?” Kolya inquired hurriedly, with a business‐like air, takingthe meat. “Dogs don’t like hot things. No, it’s all right. Look,everybody, look, Ilusha, look, old man; why aren’t you looking? He doesnot look at him, now I’ve brought him.”
The new trick consisted in making the dog stand motionless with his noseout and putting a tempting morsel of meat just on his nose. The lucklessdog had to stand without moving, with the meat on his nose, as long as hismaster chose to keep him, without a movement, perhaps for half an hour.But he kept Perezvon only for a brief moment.
“Paid for!” cried Kolya, and the meat passed in a flash from the dog’snose to his mouth. The audience, of course, expressed enthusiasm andsurprise.
“Can you really have put off coming all this time simply to train thedog?” exclaimed Alyosha, with an involuntary note of reproach in hisvoice.
“Simply for that!” answered Kolya, with perfect simplicity. “I wanted toshow him in all his glory.”
“Perezvon! Perezvon,” called Ilusha suddenly, snapping his thin fingersand beckoning to the dog.
“What is it? Let him jump up on the bed! _Ici_, Perezvon!” Kolya slappedthe bed and Perezvon darted up by Ilusha. The boy threw both arms roundhis head and Perezvon instantly licked his cheek. Ilusha crept close tohim, stretched himself out in bed and hid his face in the dog’s shaggycoat.
“Dear, dear!” kept exclaiming the captain. Kolya sat down again on theedge of the bed.
“Ilusha, I can show you another trick. I’ve brought you a little cannon.You remember, I told you about it before and you said how much you’d liketo see it. Well, here, I’ve brought it to you.”
And Kolya hurriedly pulled out of his satchel the little bronze cannon. Hehurried, because he was happy himself. Another time he would have waitedtill the sensation made by Perezvon had passed off, now he hurried onregardless of all consideration. “You are all happy now,” he felt, “sohere’s something to make you happier!” He was perfectly enchanted himself.
“I’ve been coveting this thing for a long while; it’s for you, old man,it’s for you. It belonged to Morozov, it was no use to him, he had it fromhis brother. I swopped a book from father’s book‐case for it, _A Kinsmanof Mahomet or Salutary Folly_, a scandalous book published in Moscow ahundred years ago, before they had any censorship. And Morozov has a tastefor such things. He was grateful to me, too....”
Kolya held the cannon in his hand so that all could see and admire it.Ilusha raised himself, and, with his right arm still round the dog, hegazed enchanted at the toy. The sensation was even greater when Kolyaannounced that he had gunpowder too, and that it could be fired off atonce “if it won’t alarm the ladies.” “Mamma” immediately asked to look atthe toy closer and her request was granted. She was much pleased with thelittle bronze cannon on wheels and began rolling it to and fro on her lap.She readily gave permission for the cannon to be fired, without any ideaof what she had been asked. Kolya showed the powder and the shot. Thecaptain, as a military man, undertook to load it, putting in a minutequantity of powder. He asked that the shot might be put off till anothertime. The cannon was put on the floor, aiming towards an empty part of theroom, three grains of powder were thrust into the touch‐hole and a matchwas put to it. A magnificent explosion followed. Mamma was startled, butat once laughed with delight. The boys gazed in speechless triumph. Butthe captain, looking at Ilusha, was more enchanted than any of them. Kolyapicked up the cannon and immediately presented it to Ilusha, together withthe powder and the shot.
“I got it for you, for you! I’ve been keeping it for you a long time,” herepeated once more in his delight.
“Oh, give it to me! No, give me the cannon!” mamma began begging like alittle child. Her face showed a piteous fear that she would not get it.Kolya was disconcerted. The captain fidgeted uneasily.
“Mamma, mamma,” he ran to her, “the cannon’s yours, of course, but letIlusha have it, because it’s a present to him, but it’s just as good asyours. Ilusha will always let you play with it; it shall belong to both ofyou, both of you.”
“No, I don’t want it to belong to both of us, I want it to be minealtogether, not Ilusha’s,” persisted mamma, on the point of tears.
“Take it, mother, here, keep it!” Ilusha cried. “Krassotkin, may I give itto my mother?” he turned to Krassotkin with an imploring face, as thoughhe were afraid he might be offended at his giving his present to some oneelse.
“Of course you may,” Krassotkin assented heartily, and, taking the cannonfrom Ilusha, he handed it himself to mamma with a polite bow. She was sotouched that she cried.
“Ilusha, darling, he’s the one who loves his mamma!” she said tenderly,and at once began wheeling the cannon to and fro on her lap again.
“Mamma, let me kiss your hand.” The captain darted up to her at once anddid so.
“And I never saw such a charming fellow as this nice boy,” said thegrateful lady, pointing to Krassotkin.
“And I’ll bring you as much powder as you like, Ilusha. We make the powderourselves now. Borovikov found out how it’s made—twenty‐four parts ofsaltpeter, ten of sulphur and six of birchwood charcoal. It’s all poundedtogether, mixed into a paste with water and rubbed through a tammysieve—that’s how it’s done.”
“Smurov told me about your powder, only father says it’s not realgunpowder,” responded Ilusha.
“Not real?” Kolya flushed. “It burns. I don’t know, of course.”
“No, I didn’t mean that,” put in the captain with a guilty face. “I onlysaid that real powder is not made like that, but that’s nothing, it can bemade so.”
“I don’t know, you know best. We lighted some in a pomatum pot, it burnedsplendidly, it all burnt away leaving only a tiny ash. But that was onlythe paste, and if you rub it through ... but of course you know best, Idon’t know.... And Bulkin’s father thrashed him on account of our powder,did you hear?” he turned to Ilusha.
“Yes,” answered Ilusha. He listened to Kolya with immense interest andenjoyment.
“We had prepared a whole bottle of it and he used to keep it under hisbed. His father saw it. He said it might explode, and thrashed him on thespot. He was going to make a complaint against me to the masters. He isnot allowed to go about with me now, no one is allowed to go about with menow. Smurov is not allowed to either, I’ve got a bad name with every one.They say I’m a ‘desperate character,’ ” Kolya smiled scornfully. “It allbegan from what happened on the railway.”
“Ah, we’ve heard of that exploit of yours, too,” cried the captain. “Howcould you lie still on the line? Is it possible you weren’t the leastafraid, lying there under the train? Weren’t you frightened?”
The captain was abject in his flattery of Kolya.
“N—not particularly,” answered Kolya carelessly. “What’s blasted myreputation more than anything here was that cursed goose,” he said,turning again to Ilusha. But though he assumed an unconcerned air as hetalked, he still could not control himself and was continually missing thenote he tried to keep up.
“Ah! I heard about the goose!” Ilusha laughed, beaming all over. “Theytold me, but I didn’t understand. Did they really take you to the court?”
“The most stupid, trivial affair, they made a mountain of a molehill asthey always do,” Kolya began carelessly. “I was walking through themarket‐place here one day, just when they’d driven in the geese. I stoppedand looked at them. All at once a fellow, who is an errand‐boy atPlotnikov’s now, looked at me and said, ‘What are you looking at the geesefor?’ I looked at him; he was a stupid, moon‐faced fellow of twenty. I amalways on the side of the peasantry, you know. I like talking to thepeasants.... We’ve dropped behind the peasants—that’s an axiom. I believeyou are laughing, Karamazov?”
“No, Heaven forbid, I am listening,” said Alyosha with a most good‐naturedair, and the sensitive Kolya was immediately reassured.
“My theory, Karamazov, is clear and simple,” he hurried on again, lookingpleased. “I believe in the people and am always glad to give them theirdue, but I am not for spoiling them, that is a _sine qua non_ ... But Iwas telling you about the goose. So I turned to the fool and answered, ‘Iam wondering what the goose thinks about.’ He looked at me quite stupidly,‘And what does the goose think about?’ he asked. ‘Do you see that cartfull of oats?’ I said. ‘The oats are dropping out of the sack, and thegoose has put its neck right under the wheel to gobble them up—do yousee?’ ‘I see that quite well,’ he said. ‘Well,’ said I, ‘if that cart wereto move on a little, would it break the goose’s neck or not?’ ‘It’d besure to break it,’ and he grinned all over his face, highly delighted.‘Come on, then,’ said I, ‘let’s try.’ ‘Let’s,’ he said. And it did nottake us long to arrange: he stood at the bridle without being noticed, andI stood on one side to direct the goose. And the owner wasn’t looking, hewas talking to some one, so I had nothing to do, the goose thrust its headin after the oats of itself, under the cart, just under the wheel. Iwinked at the lad, he tugged at the bridle, and crack. The goose’s neckwas broken in half. And, as luck would have it, all the peasants saw us atthat moment and they kicked up a shindy at once. ‘You did that onpurpose!’ ‘No, not on purpose.’ ‘Yes, you did, on purpose!’ Well, theyshouted, ‘Take him to the justice of the peace!’ They took me, too. ‘Youwere there, too,’ they said, ‘you helped, you’re known all over themarket!’ And, for some reason, I really am known all over the market,”Kolya added conceitedly. “We all went off to the justice’s, they broughtthe goose, too. The fellow was crying in a great funk, simply blubberinglike a woman. And the farmer kept shouting that you could kill any numberof geese like that. Well, of course, there were witnesses. The justice ofthe peace settled it in a minute, that the farmer was to be paid a roublefor the goose, and the fellow to have the goose. And he was warned not toplay such pranks again. And the fellow kept blubbering like a woman. ‘Itwasn’t me,’ he said, ‘it was he egged me on,’ and he pointed to me. Ianswered with the utmost composure that I hadn’t egged him on, that Isimply stated the general proposition, had spoken hypothetically. Thejustice of the peace smiled and was vexed with himself at once for havingsmiled. ‘I’ll complain to your masters of you, so that for the future youmayn’t waste your time on such general propositions, instead of sitting atyour books and learning your lessons.’ He didn’t complain to the masters,that was a joke, but the matter was noised abroad and came to the ears ofthe masters. Their ears are long, you know! The classical master,Kolbasnikov, was particularly shocked about it, but Dardanelov got me offagain. But Kolbasnikov is savage with every one now like a green ass. Didyou know, Ilusha, he is just married, got a dowry of a thousand roubles,and his bride’s a regular fright of the first rank and the last degree.The third‐class fellows wrote an epigram on it:

    Astounding news has reached the class,    Kolbasnikov has been an ass.

And so on, awfully funny, I’ll bring it to you later on. I say nothingagainst Dardanelov, he is a learned man, there’s no doubt about it. Irespect men like that and it’s not because he stood up for me.”
“But you took him down about the founders of Troy!” Smurov put insuddenly, unmistakably proud of Krassotkin at such a moment. He wasparticularly pleased with the story of the goose.
“Did you really take him down?” the captain inquired, in a flattering way.“On the question who founded Troy? We heard of it, Ilusha told me about itat the time.”
“He knows everything, father, he knows more than any of us!” put inIlusha; “he only pretends to be like that, but really he is top in everysubject....”
Ilusha looked at Kolya with infinite happiness.
“Oh, that’s all nonsense about Troy, a trivial matter. I consider this anunimportant question,” said Kolya with haughty humility. He had by nowcompletely recovered his dignity, though he was still a little uneasy. Hefelt that he was greatly excited and that he had talked about the goose,for instance, with too little reserve, while Alyosha had looked seriousand had not said a word all the time. And the vain boy began by degrees tohave a rankling fear that Alyosha was silent because he despised him, andthought he was showing off before him. If he dared to think anything likethat Kolya would—
“I regard the question as quite a trivial one,” he rapped out again,proudly.
“And I know who founded Troy,” a boy, who had not spoken before, saidsuddenly, to the surprise of every one. He was silent and seemed to beshy. He was a pretty boy of about eleven, called Kartashov. He was sittingnear the door. Kolya looked at him with dignified amazement.
The fact was that the identity of the founders of Troy had become a secretfor the whole school, a secret which could only be discovered by readingSmaragdov, and no one had Smaragdov but Kolya. One day, when Kolya’s backwas turned, Kartashov hastily opened Smaragdov, which lay among Kolya’sbooks, and immediately lighted on the passage relating to the foundationof Troy. This was a good time ago, but he felt uneasy and could not bringhimself to announce publicly that he too knew who had founded Troy, afraidof what might happen and of Krassotkin’s somehow putting him to shame overit. But now he couldn’t resist saying it. For weeks he had been longingto.
“Well, who did found it?” asked Kolya, turning to him with haughtysuperciliousness. He saw from his face that he really did know and at oncemade up his mind how to take it. There was, so to speak, a discordant notein the general harmony.
“Troy was founded by Teucer, Dardanus, Ilius and Tros,” the boy rapped outat once, and in the same instant he blushed, blushed so, that it waspainful to look at him. But the boys stared at him, stared at him for awhole minute, and then all the staring eyes turned at once and werefastened upon Kolya, who was still scanning the audacious boy withdisdainful composure.
“In what sense did they found it?” he deigned to comment at last. “Andwhat is meant by founding a city or a state? What do they do? Did they goand each lay a brick, do you suppose?”
There was laughter. The offending boy turned from pink to crimson. He wassilent and on the point of tears. Kolya held him so for a minute.
“Before you talk of a historical event like the foundation of anationality, you must first understand what you mean by it,” he admonishedhim in stern, incisive tones. “But I attach no consequence to these oldwives’ tales and I don’t think much of universal history in general,” headded carelessly, addressing the company generally.
“Universal history?” the captain inquired, looking almost scared.
“Yes, universal history! It’s the study of the successive follies ofmankind and nothing more. The only subjects I respect are mathematics andnatural science,” said Kolya. He was showing off and he stole a glance atAlyosha; his was the only opinion he was afraid of there. But Alyosha wasstill silent and still serious as before. If Alyosha had said a word itwould have stopped him, but Alyosha was silent and “it might be thesilence of contempt,” and that finally irritated Kolya.
“The classical languages, too ... they are simply madness, nothing more.You seem to disagree with me again, Karamazov?”
“I don’t agree,” said Alyosha, with a faint smile.
“The study of the classics, if you ask my opinion, is simply a policemeasure, that’s simply why it has been introduced into our schools.” Bydegrees Kolya began to get breathless again. “Latin and Greek wereintroduced because they are a bore and because they stupefy the intellect.It was dull before, so what could they do to make things duller? It wassenseless enough before, so what could they do to make it more senseless?So they thought of Greek and Latin. That’s my opinion, I hope I shallnever change it,” Kolya finished abruptly. His cheeks were flushed.
“That’s true,” assented Smurov suddenly, in a ringing tone of conviction.He had listened attentively.
“And yet he is first in Latin himself,” cried one of the group of boyssuddenly.
“Yes, father, he says that and yet he is first in Latin,” echoed Ilusha.
“What of it?” Kolya thought fit to defend himself, though the praise wasvery sweet to him. “I am fagging away at Latin because I have to, becauseI promised my mother to pass my examination, and I think that whatever youdo, it’s worth doing it well. But in my soul I have a profound contemptfor the classics and all that fraud.... You don’t agree, Karamazov?”
“Why ‘fraud’?” Alyosha smiled again.
“Well, all the classical authors have been translated into all languages,so it was not for the sake of studying the classics they introduced Latin,but solely as a police measure, to stupefy the intelligence. So what canone call it but a fraud?”
“Why, who taught you all this?” cried Alyosha, surprised at last.
“In the first place I am capable of thinking for myself without beingtaught. Besides, what I said just now about the classics being translatedour teacher Kolbasnikov has said to the whole of the third class.”
“The doctor has come!” cried Nina, who had been silent till then.
A carriage belonging to Madame Hohlakov drove up to the gate. The captain,who had been expecting the doctor all the morning, rushed headlong out tomeet him. “Mamma” pulled herself together and assumed a dignified air.Alyosha went up to Ilusha and began setting his pillows straight. Nina,from her invalid chair, anxiously watched him putting the bed tidy. Theboys hurriedly took leave. Some of them promised to come again in theevening. Kolya called Perezvon and the dog jumped off the bed.
“I won’t go away, I won’t go away,” Kolya said hastily to Ilusha. “I’llwait in the passage and come back when the doctor’s gone, I’ll come backwith Perezvon.”
But by now the doctor had entered, an important‐looking person with long,dark whiskers and a shiny, shaven chin, wearing a bearskin coat. As hecrossed the threshold he stopped, taken aback; he probably fancied he hadcome to the wrong place. “How is this? Where am I?” he muttered, notremoving his coat nor his peaked sealskin cap. The crowd, the poverty ofthe room, the washing hanging on a line in the corner, puzzled him. Thecaptain, bent double, was bowing low before him.
“It’s here, sir, here, sir,” he muttered cringingly; “it’s here, you’vecome right, you were coming to us...”
“Sne‐gi‐ryov?” the doctor said loudly and pompously. “Mr. Snegiryov—isthat you?”
“That’s me, sir!”
“Ah!”
The doctor looked round the room with a squeamish air once more and threwoff his coat, displaying to all eyes the grand decoration at his neck. Thecaptain caught the fur coat in the air, and the doctor took off his cap.
“Where is the patient?” he asked emphatically.


Chapter VI. Precocity

“What do you think the doctor will say to him?” Kolya asked quickly. “Whata repulsive mug, though, hasn’t he? I can’t endure medicine!”
“Ilusha is dying. I think that’s certain,” answered Alyosha, mournfully.
“They are rogues! Medicine’s a fraud! I am glad to have made youracquaintance, though, Karamazov. I wanted to know you for a long time. Iam only sorry we meet in such sad circumstances.”
Kolya had a great inclination to say something even warmer and moredemonstrative, but he felt ill at ease. Alyosha noticed this, smiled, andpressed his hand.
“I’ve long learned to respect you as a rare person,” Kolya muttered again,faltering and uncertain. “I have heard you are a mystic and have been inthe monastery. I know you are a mystic, but ... that hasn’t put me off.Contact with real life will cure you.... It’s always so with characterslike yours.”
“What do you mean by mystic? Cure me of what?” Alyosha was ratherastonished.
“Oh, God and all the rest of it.”
“What, don’t you believe in God?”
“Oh, I’ve nothing against God. Of course, God is only a hypothesis, but... I admit that He is needed ... for the order of the universe and allthat ... and that if there were no God He would have to be invented,”added Kolya, beginning to blush. He suddenly fancied that Alyosha mightthink he was trying to show off his knowledge and to prove that he was“grown up.” “I haven’t the slightest desire to show off my knowledge tohim,” Kolya thought indignantly. And all of a sudden he felt horriblyannoyed.
“I must confess I can’t endure entering on such discussions,” he said witha final air. “It’s possible for one who doesn’t believe in God to lovemankind, don’t you think so? Voltaire didn’t believe in God and lovedmankind?” (“I am at it again,” he thought to himself.)
“Voltaire believed in God, though not very much, I think, and I don’tthink he loved mankind very much either,” said Alyosha quietly, gently,and quite naturally, as though he were talking to some one of his own age,or even older. Kolya was particularly struck by Alyosha’s apparentdiffidence about his opinion of Voltaire. He seemed to be leaving thequestion for him, little Kolya, to settle.
“Have you read Voltaire?” Alyosha finished.
“No, not to say read.... But I’ve read _Candide_ in the Russiantranslation ... in an absurd, grotesque, old translation ... (At it again!again!)”
“And did you understand it?”
“Oh, yes, everything.... That is ... Why do you suppose I shouldn’tunderstand it? There’s a lot of nastiness in it, of course.... Of course Ican understand that it’s a philosophical novel and written to advocate anidea....” Kolya was getting mixed by now. “I am a Socialist, Karamazov, Iam an incurable Socialist,” he announced suddenly, apropos of nothing.
“A Socialist?” laughed Alyosha. “But when have you had time to become one?Why, I thought you were only thirteen?”
Kolya winced.
“In the first place I am not thirteen, but fourteen, fourteen in afortnight,” he flushed angrily, “and in the second place I am at acomplete loss to understand what my age has to do with it? The question iswhat are my convictions, not what is my age, isn’t it?”
“When you are older, you’ll understand for yourself the influence of ageon convictions. I fancied, too, that you were not expressing your ownideas,” Alyosha answered serenely and modestly, but Kolya interrupted himhotly:
“Come, you want obedience and mysticism. You must admit that the Christianreligion, for instance, has only been of use to the rich and the powerfulto keep the lower classes in slavery. That’s so, isn’t it?”
“Ah, I know where you read that, and I am sure some one told you so!”cried Alyosha.
“I say, what makes you think I read it? And certainly no one told me so. Ican think for myself.... I am not opposed to Christ, if you like. He was amost humane person, and if He were alive to‐day, He would be found in theranks of the revolutionists, and would perhaps play a conspicuous part....There’s no doubt about that.”
“Oh, where, where did you get that from? What fool have you made friendswith?” exclaimed Alyosha.
“Come, the truth will out! It has so chanced that I have often talked toMr. Rakitin, of course, but ... old Byelinsky said that, too, so theysay.”
“Byelinsky? I don’t remember. He hasn’t written that anywhere.”
“If he didn’t write it, they say he said it. I heard that from a ... butnever mind.”
“And have you read Byelinsky?”
“Well, no ... I haven’t read all of him, but ... I read the passage aboutTatyana, why she didn’t go off with Onyegin.”
“Didn’t go off with Onyegin? Surely you don’t ... understand thatalready?”
“Why, you seem to take me for little Smurov,” said Kolya, with a grin ofirritation. “But please don’t suppose I am such a revolutionist. I oftendisagree with Mr. Rakitin. Though I mention Tatyana, I am not at all forthe emancipation of women. I acknowledge that women are a subject race andmust obey. _Les femmes tricottent_, as Napoleon said.” Kolya, for somereason, smiled, “And on that question at least I am quite of one mind withthat pseudo‐great man. I think, too, that to leave one’s own country andfly to America is mean, worse than mean—silly. Why go to America when onemay be of great service to humanity here? Now especially. There’s aperfect mass of fruitful activity open to us. That’s what I answered.”
“What do you mean? Answered whom? Has some one suggested your going toAmerica already?”
“I must own, they’ve been at me to go, but I declined. That’s betweenourselves, of course, Karamazov; do you hear, not a word to any one. I saythis only to you. I am not at all anxious to fall into the clutches of thesecret police and take lessons at the Chain bridge.

    _Long will you remember_    _The house at the Chain bridge._

Do you remember? It’s splendid. Why are you laughing? You don’t suppose Iam fibbing, do you?” (“What if he should find out that I’ve only that onenumber of _The Bell_ in father’s bookcase, and haven’t read any more ofit?” Kolya thought with a shudder.)
“Oh, no, I am not laughing and don’t suppose for a moment that you arelying. No, indeed, I can’t suppose so, for all this, alas! is perfectlytrue. But tell me, have you read Pushkin—_Onyegin_, for instance?... Youspoke just now of Tatyana.”
“No, I haven’t read it yet, but I want to read it. I have no prejudices,Karamazov; I want to hear both sides. What makes you ask?”
“Oh, nothing.”
“Tell me, Karamazov, have you an awful contempt for me?” Kolya rapped outsuddenly and drew himself up before Alyosha, as though he were on drill.“Be so kind as to tell me, without beating about the bush.”
“I have a contempt for you?” Alyosha looked at him wondering. “What for? Iam only sad that a charming nature such as yours should be perverted byall this crude nonsense before you have begun life.”
“Don’t be anxious about my nature,” Kolya interrupted, not withoutcomplacency. “But it’s true that I am stupidly sensitive, crudelysensitive. You smiled just now, and I fancied you seemed to—”
“Oh, my smile meant something quite different. I’ll tell you why I smiled.Not long ago I read the criticism made by a German who had lived inRussia, on our students and schoolboys of to‐day. ‘Show a Russianschoolboy,’ he writes, ‘a map of the stars, which he knows nothing about,and he will give you back the map next day with corrections on it.’ Noknowledge and unbounded conceit—that’s what the German meant to say aboutthe Russian schoolboy.”
“Yes, that’s perfectly right,” Kolya laughed suddenly, “exactly so! Bravothe German! But he did not see the good side, what do you think? Conceitmay be, that comes from youth, that will be corrected if need be, but, onthe other hand, there is an independent spirit almost from childhood,boldness of thought and conviction, and not the spirit of these sausagemakers, groveling before authority.... But the German was right all thesame. Bravo the German! But Germans want strangling all the same. Thoughthey are so good at science and learning they must be strangled.”
“Strangled, what for?” smiled Alyosha.
“Well, perhaps I am talking nonsense, I agree. I am awfully childishsometimes, and when I am pleased about anything I can’t restrain myselfand am ready to talk any stuff. But, I say, we are chattering away hereabout nothing, and that doctor has been a long time in there. But perhapshe’s examining the mamma and that poor crippled Nina. I liked that Nina,you know. She whispered to me suddenly as I was coming away, ‘Why didn’tyou come before?’ And in such a voice, so reproachfully! I think she isawfully nice and pathetic.”
“Yes, yes! Well, you’ll be coming often, you will see what she is like. Itwould do you a great deal of good to know people like that, to learn tovalue a great deal which you will find out from knowing these people,”Alyosha observed warmly. “That would have more effect on you thananything.”
“Oh, how I regret and blame myself for not having come sooner!” Kolyaexclaimed, with bitter feeling.
“Yes, it’s a great pity. You saw for yourself how delighted the poor childwas to see you. And how he fretted for you to come!”
“Don’t tell me! You make it worse! But it serves me right. What kept mefrom coming was my conceit, my egoistic vanity, and the beastlywilfullness, which I never can get rid of, though I’ve been strugglingwith it all my life. I see that now. I am a beast in lots of ways,Karamazov!”
“No, you have a charming nature, though it’s been distorted, and I quiteunderstand why you have had such an influence on this generous, morbidlysensitive boy,” Alyosha answered warmly.
“And you say that to me!” cried Kolya; “and would you believe it, Ithought—I’ve thought several times since I’ve been here—that you despisedme! If only you knew how I prize your opinion!”
“But are you really so sensitive? At your age! Would you believe it, justnow, when you were telling your story, I thought, as I watched you, thatyou must be very sensitive!”
“You thought so? What an eye you’ve got, I say! I bet that was when I wastalking about the goose. That was just when I was fancying you had a greatcontempt for me for being in such a hurry to show off, and for a moment Iquite hated you for it, and began talking like a fool. Then I fancied—justnow, here—when I said that if there were no God He would have to beinvented, that I was in too great a hurry to display my knowledge,especially as I got that phrase out of a book. But I swear I wasn’tshowing off out of vanity, though I really don’t know why. Because I wasso pleased? Yes, I believe it was because I was so pleased ... though it’sperfectly disgraceful for any one to be gushing directly they are pleased,I know that. But I am convinced now that you don’t despise me; it was allmy imagination. Oh, Karamazov, I am profoundly unhappy. I sometimes fancyall sorts of things, that every one is laughing at me, the whole world,and then I feel ready to overturn the whole order of things.”
“And you worry every one about you,” smiled Alyosha.
“Yes, I worry every one about me, especially my mother. Karamazov, tellme, am I very ridiculous now?”
“Don’t think about that, don’t think of it at all!” cried Alyosha. “Andwhat does ridiculous mean? Isn’t every one constantly being or seemingridiculous? Besides, nearly all clever people now are fearfully afraid ofbeing ridiculous, and that makes them unhappy. All I am surprised at isthat you should be feeling that so early, though I’ve observed it for sometime past, and not only in you. Nowadays the very children have begun tosuffer from it. It’s almost a sort of insanity. The devil has taken theform of that vanity and entered into the whole generation; it’s simply thedevil,” added Alyosha, without a trace of the smile that Kolya, staring athim, expected to see. “You are like every one else,” said Alyosha, inconclusion, “that is, like very many others. Only you must not be likeeverybody else, that’s all.”
“Even if every one is like that?”
“Yes, even if every one is like that. You be the only one not like it. Youreally are not like every one else, here you are not ashamed to confess tosomething bad and even ridiculous. And who will admit so much in thesedays? No one. And people have even ceased to feel the impulse to self‐criticism. Don’t be like every one else, even if you are the only one.”
“Splendid! I was not mistaken in you. You know how to console one. Oh, howI have longed to know you, Karamazov! I’ve long been eager for thismeeting. Can you really have thought about me, too? You said just now thatyou thought of me, too?”
“Yes, I’d heard of you and had thought of you, too ... and if it’s partlyvanity that makes you ask, it doesn’t matter.”
“Do you know, Karamazov, our talk has been like a declaration of love,”said Kolya, in a bashful and melting voice. “That’s not ridiculous, isit?”
“Not at all ridiculous, and if it were, it wouldn’t matter, because it’sbeen a good thing.” Alyosha smiled brightly.
“But do you know, Karamazov, you must admit that you are a little ashamedyourself, now.... I see it by your eyes.” Kolya smiled with a sort of slyhappiness.
“Why ashamed?”
“Well, why are you blushing?”
“It was you made me blush,” laughed Alyosha, and he really did blush. “Oh,well, I am a little, goodness knows why, I don’t know...” he muttered,almost embarrassed.
“Oh, how I love you and admire you at this moment just because you arerather ashamed! Because you are just like me,” cried Kolya, in positiveecstasy. His cheeks glowed, his eyes beamed.
“You know, Kolya, you will be very unhappy in your life,” something madeAlyosha say suddenly.
“I know, I know. How you know it all beforehand!” Kolya agreed at once.
“But you will bless life on the whole, all the same.”
“Just so, hurrah! You are a prophet. Oh, we shall get on together,Karamazov! Do you know, what delights me most, is that you treat me quitelike an equal. But we are not equals, no, we are not, you are better! Butwe shall get on. Do you know, all this last month, I’ve been saying tomyself, ‘Either we shall be friends at once, for ever, or we shall partenemies to the grave!’ ”
“And saying that, of course, you loved me,” Alyosha laughed gayly.
“I did. I loved you awfully. I’ve been loving and dreaming of you. And howdo you know it all beforehand? Ah, here’s the doctor. Goodness! What willhe tell us? Look at his face!”


Chapter VII. Ilusha

The doctor came out of the room again, muffled in his fur coat and withhis cap on his head. His face looked almost angry and disgusted, as thoughhe were afraid of getting dirty. He cast a cursory glance round thepassage, looking sternly at Alyosha and Kolya as he did so. Alyosha wavedfrom the door to the coachman, and the carriage that had brought thedoctor drove up. The captain darted out after the doctor, and, bowingapologetically, stopped him to get the last word. The poor fellow lookedutterly crushed; there was a scared look in his eyes.
“Your Excellency, your Excellency ... is it possible?” he began, but couldnot go on and clasped his hands in despair. Yet he still gazed imploringlyat the doctor, as though a word from him might still change the poor boy’sfate.
“I can’t help it, I am not God!” the doctor answered offhand, though withthe customary impressiveness.
“Doctor ... your Excellency ... and will it be soon, soon?”
“You must be prepared for anything,” said the doctor in emphatic andincisive tones, and dropping his eyes, he was about to step out to thecoach.
“Your Excellency, for Christ’s sake!” the terror‐stricken captain stoppedhim again. “Your Excellency! but can nothing, absolutely nothing save himnow?”
“It’s not in my hands now,” said the doctor impatiently, “but h’m!...” hestopped suddenly. “If you could, for instance ... send ... your patient... at once, without delay” (the words “at once, without delay,” thedoctor uttered with an almost wrathful sternness that made the captainstart) “to Syracuse, the change to the new be‐ne‐ficial climaticconditions might possibly effect—”
“To Syracuse!” cried the captain, unable to grasp what was said.
“Syracuse is in Sicily,” Kolya jerked out suddenly in explanation. Thedoctor looked at him.
“Sicily! your Excellency,” faltered the captain, “but you’ve seen”—hespread out his hands, indicating his surroundings—“mamma and my family?”
“N—no, Sicily is not the place for the family, the family should go toCaucasus in the early spring ... your daughter must go to the Caucasus,and your wife ... after a course of the waters in the Caucasus for herrheumatism ... must be sent straight to Paris to the mental specialistLepelletier; I could give you a note to him, and then ... there might be achange—”
“Doctor, doctor! But you see!” The captain flung wide his hands againdespairingly, indicating the bare wooden walls of the passage.
“Well, that’s not my business,” grinned the doctor. “I have only told youthe answer of medical science to your question as to possible treatment.As for the rest, to my regret—”
“Don’t be afraid, apothecary, my dog won’t bite you,” Kolya rapped outloudly, noticing the doctor’s rather uneasy glance at Perezvon, who wasstanding in the doorway. There was a wrathful note in Kolya’s voice. Heused the word apothecary instead of doctor on purpose, and, as heexplained afterwards, used it “to insult him.”
“What’s that?” The doctor flung up his head, staring with surprise atKolya. “Who’s this?” he addressed Alyosha, as though asking him toexplain.
“It’s Perezvon’s master, don’t worry about me,” Kolya said incisivelyagain.
“Perezvon?” repeated the doctor, perplexed.
“He hears the bell, but where it is he cannot tell. Good‐by, we shall meetin Syracuse.”
“Who’s this? Who’s this?” The doctor flew into a terrible rage.
“He is a schoolboy, doctor, he is a mischievous boy; take no notice ofhim,” said Alyosha, frowning and speaking quickly. “Kolya, hold yourtongue!” he cried to Krassotkin. “Take no notice of him, doctor,” herepeated, rather impatiently.
“He wants a thrashing, a good thrashing!” The doctor stamped in a perfectfury.
“And you know, apothecary, my Perezvon might bite!” said Kolya, turningpale, with quivering voice and flashing eyes. “_Ici_, Perezvon!”
“Kolya, if you say another word, I’ll have nothing more to do with you,”Alyosha cried peremptorily.
“There is only one man in the world who can command NikolayKrassotkin—this is the man”; Kolya pointed to Alyosha. “I obey him, good‐by!”
He stepped forward, opened the door, and quickly went into the inner room.Perezvon flew after him. The doctor stood still for five seconds inamazement, looking at Alyosha; then, with a curse, he went out quickly tothe carriage, repeating aloud, “This is ... this is ... I don’t know whatit is!” The captain darted forward to help him into the carriage. Alyoshafollowed Kolya into the room. He was already by Ilusha’s bedside. The sickboy was holding his hand and calling for his father. A minute later thecaptain, too, came back.
“Father, father, come ... we ...” Ilusha faltered in violent excitement,but apparently unable to go on, he flung his wasted arms round his fatherand Kolya, uniting them in one embrace, and hugging them as tightly as hecould. The captain suddenly began to shake with dumb sobs, and Kolya’slips and chin twitched.
“Father, father! How sorry I am for you!” Ilusha moaned bitterly.
“Ilusha ... darling ... the doctor said ... you would be all right ... weshall be happy ... the doctor ...” the captain began.
“Ah, father! I know what the new doctor said to you about me.... I saw!”cried Ilusha, and again he hugged them both with all his strength, hidinghis face on his father’s shoulder.
“Father, don’t cry, and when I die get a good boy, another one ... chooseone of them all, a good one, call him Ilusha and love him instead ofme....”
“Hush, old man, you’ll get well,” Krassotkin cried suddenly, in a voicethat sounded angry.
“But don’t ever forget me, father,” Ilusha went on, “come to my grave ...and, father, bury me by our big stone, where we used to go for our walk,and come to me there with Krassotkin in the evening ... and Perezvon ... Ishall expect you.... Father, father!”
His voice broke. They were all three silent, still embracing. Nina wascrying quietly in her chair, and at last seeing them all crying, “mamma,”too, burst into tears.
“Ilusha! Ilusha!” she exclaimed.
Krassotkin suddenly released himself from Ilusha’s embrace.
“Good‐by, old man, mother expects me back to dinner,” he said quickly.“What a pity I did not tell her! She will be dreadfully anxious.... Butafter dinner I’ll come back to you for the whole day, for the wholeevening, and I’ll tell you all sorts of things, all sorts of things. AndI’ll bring Perezvon, but now I will take him with me, because he willbegin to howl when I am away and bother you. Good‐by!”
And he ran out into the passage. He didn’t want to cry, but in the passagehe burst into tears. Alyosha found him crying.
“Kolya, you must be sure to keep your word and come, or he will beterribly disappointed,” Alyosha said emphatically.
“I will! Oh, how I curse myself for not having come before!” mutteredKolya, crying, and no longer ashamed of it.
At that moment the captain flew out of the room, and at once closed thedoor behind him. His face looked frenzied, his lips were trembling. Hestood before the two and flung up his arms.
“I don’t want a good boy! I don’t want another boy!” he muttered in a wildwhisper, clenching his teeth. “If I forget thee, Jerusalem, may mytongue—” He broke off with a sob and sank on his knees before the woodenbench. Pressing his fists against his head, he began sobbing with absurdwhimpering cries, doing his utmost that his cries should not be heard inthe room.
Kolya ran out into the street.
“Good‐by, Karamazov? Will you come yourself?” he cried sharply and angrilyto Alyosha.
“I will certainly come in the evening.”
“What was that he said about Jerusalem?... What did he mean by that?”
“It’s from the Bible. ‘If I forget thee, Jerusalem,’ that is, if I forgetall that is most precious to me, if I let anything take its place, thenmay—”
“I understand, that’s enough! Mind you come! _Ici_, Perezvon!” he criedwith positive ferocity to the dog, and with rapid strides he went home.



Book XI. Ivan


Chapter I. At Grushenka’s

Alyosha went towards the cathedral square to the widow Morozov’s house tosee Grushenka, who had sent Fenya to him early in the morning with anurgent message begging him to come. Questioning Fenya, Alyosha learnedthat her mistress had been particularly distressed since the previous day.During the two months that had passed since Mitya’s arrest, Alyosha hadcalled frequently at the widow Morozov’s house, both from his owninclination and to take messages for Mitya. Three days after Mitya’sarrest, Grushenka was taken very ill and was ill for nearly five weeks.For one whole week she was unconscious. She was very much changed—thinnerand a little sallow, though she had for the past fortnight been wellenough to go out. But to Alyosha her face was even more attractive thanbefore, and he liked to meet her eyes when he went in to her. A look offirmness and intelligent purpose had developed in her face. There weresigns of a spiritual transformation in her, and a steadfast, fine andhumble determination that nothing could shake could be discerned in her.There was a small vertical line between her brows which gave her charmingface a look of concentrated thought, almost austere at the first glance.There was scarcely a trace of her former frivolity.
It seemed strange to Alyosha, too, that in spite of the calamity that hadovertaken the poor girl, betrothed to a man who had been arrested for aterrible crime, almost at the instant of their betrothal, in spite of herillness and the almost inevitable sentence hanging over Mitya, Grushenkahad not yet lost her youthful cheerfulness. There was a soft light in theonce proud eyes, though at times they gleamed with the old vindictive firewhen she was visited by one disturbing thought stronger than ever in herheart. The object of that uneasiness was the same as ever—KaterinaIvanovna, of whom Grushenka had even raved when she lay in delirium.Alyosha knew that she was fearfully jealous of her. Yet Katerina Ivanovnahad not once visited Mitya in his prison, though she might have done itwhenever she liked. All this made a difficult problem for Alyosha, for hewas the only person to whom Grushenka opened her heart and from whom shewas continually asking advice. Sometimes he was unable to say anything.
Full of anxiety he entered her lodging. She was at home. She had returnedfrom seeing Mitya half an hour before, and from the rapid movement withwhich she leapt up from her chair to meet him he saw that she had beenexpecting him with great impatience. A pack of cards dealt for a game of“fools” lay on the table. A bed had been made up on the leather sofa onthe other side and Maximov lay, half‐reclining, on it. He wore a dressing‐gown and a cotton nightcap, and was evidently ill and weak, though he wassmiling blissfully. When the homeless old man returned with Grushenka fromMokroe two months before, he had simply stayed on and was still stayingwith her. He arrived with her in rain and sleet, sat down on the sofa,drenched and scared, and gazed mutely at her with a timid, appealingsmile. Grushenka, who was in terrible grief and in the first stage offever, almost forgot his existence in all she had to do the first half‐hour after her arrival. Suddenly she chanced to look at him intently: helaughed a pitiful, helpless little laugh. She called Fenya and told her togive him something to eat. All that day he sat in the same place, almostwithout stirring. When it got dark and the shutters were closed, Fenyaasked her mistress:
“Is the gentleman going to stay the night, mistress?”
“Yes; make him a bed on the sofa,” answered Grushenka.
Questioning him more in detail, Grushenka learned from him that he hadliterally nowhere to go, and that “Mr. Kalganov, my benefactor, told mestraight that he wouldn’t receive me again and gave me five roubles.”
“Well, God bless you, you’d better stay, then,” Grushenka decided in hergrief, smiling compassionately at him. Her smile wrung the old man’s heartand his lips twitched with grateful tears. And so the destitute wandererhad stayed with her ever since. He did not leave the house even when shewas ill. Fenya and her grandmother, the cook, did not turn him out, butwent on serving him meals and making up his bed on the sofa. Grushenka hadgrown used to him, and coming back from seeing Mitya (whom she had begunto visit in prison before she was really well) she would sit down andbegin talking to “Maximushka” about trifling matters, to keep her fromthinking of her sorrow. The old man turned out to be a good story‐telleron occasions, so that at last he became necessary to her. Grushenka sawscarcely any one else beside Alyosha, who did not come every day and neverstayed long. Her old merchant lay seriously ill at this time, “at his lastgasp” as they said in the town, and he did, in fact, die a week afterMitya’s trial. Three weeks before his death, feeling the end approaching,he made his sons, their wives and children, come upstairs to him at lastand bade them not leave him again. From that moment he gave strict ordersto his servants not to admit Grushenka and to tell her if she came, “Themaster wishes you long life and happiness and tells you to forget him.”But Grushenka sent almost every day to inquire after him.
“You’ve come at last!” she cried, flinging down the cards and joyfullygreeting Alyosha, “and Maximushka’s been scaring me that perhaps youwouldn’t come. Ah, how I need you! Sit down to the table. What will youhave—coffee?”
“Yes, please,” said Alyosha, sitting down at the table. “I am veryhungry.”
“That’s right. Fenya, Fenya, coffee,” cried Grushenka. “It’s been made along time ready for you. And bring some little pies, and mind they arehot. Do you know, we’ve had a storm over those pies to‐day. I took them tothe prison for him, and would you believe it, he threw them back to me: hewould not eat them. He flung one of them on the floor and stamped on it.So I said to him: ‘I shall leave them with the warder; if you don’t eatthem before evening, it will be that your venomous spite is enough foryou!’ With that I went away. We quarreled again, would you believe it?Whenever I go we quarrel.”
Grushenka said all this in one breath in her agitation. Maximov, feelingnervous, at once smiled and looked on the floor.
“What did you quarrel about this time?” asked Alyosha.
“I didn’t expect it in the least. Only fancy, he is jealous of the Pole.‘Why are you keeping him?’ he said. ‘So you’ve begun keeping him.’ He isjealous, jealous of me all the time, jealous eating and sleeping! He eventook it into his head to be jealous of Kuzma last week.”
“But he knew about the Pole before?”
“Yes, but there it is. He has known about him from the very beginning, butto‐day he suddenly got up and began scolding about him. I am ashamed torepeat what he said. Silly fellow! Rakitin went in as I came out. PerhapsRakitin is egging him on. What do you think?” she added carelessly.
“He loves you, that’s what it is: he loves you so much. And now he isparticularly worried.”
“I should think he might be, with the trial to‐morrow. And I went to himto say something about to‐morrow, for I dread to think what’s going tohappen then. You say that he is worried, but how worried I am! And hetalks about the Pole! He’s too silly! He is not jealous of Maximushka yet,anyway.”
“My wife was dreadfully jealous over me, too,” Maximov put in his word.
“Jealous of you?” Grushenka laughed in spite of herself. “Of whom couldshe have been jealous?”
“Of the servant girls.”
“Hold your tongue, Maximushka, I am in no laughing mood now; I feel angry.Don’t ogle the pies. I shan’t give you any; they are not good for you, andI won’t give you any vodka either. I have to look after him, too, just asthough I kept an almshouse,” she laughed.
“I don’t deserve your kindness. I am a worthless creature,” said Maximov,with tears in his voice. “You would do better to spend your kindness onpeople of more use than me.”
“Ech, every one is of use, Maximushka, and how can we tell who’s of mostuse? If only that Pole didn’t exist, Alyosha. He’s taken it into his headto fall ill, too, to‐day. I’ve been to see him also. And I shall send himsome pies, too, on purpose. I hadn’t sent him any, but Mitya accused me ofit, so now I shall send some! Ah, here’s Fenya with a letter! Yes, it’sfrom the Poles—begging again!”
Pan Mussyalovitch had indeed sent an extremely long and characteristicallyeloquent letter in which he begged her to lend him three roubles. In theletter was enclosed a receipt for the sum, with a promise to repay itwithin three months, signed by Pan Vrublevsky as well. Grushenka hadreceived many such letters, accompanied by such receipts, from her formerlover during the fortnight of her convalescence. But she knew that the twoPoles had been to ask after her health during her illness. The firstletter Grushenka got from them was a long one, written on large notepaperand with a big family crest on the seal. It was so obscure and rhetoricalthat Grushenka put it down before she had read half, unable to make heador tail of it. She could not attend to letters then. The first letter wasfollowed next day by another in which Pan Mussyalovitch begged her for aloan of two thousand roubles for a very short period. Grushenka left thatletter, too, unanswered. A whole series of letters had followed—one everyday—all as pompous and rhetorical, but the loan asked for, graduallydiminishing, dropped to a hundred roubles, then to twenty‐five, to ten,and finally Grushenka received a letter in which both the Poles begged herfor only one rouble and included a receipt signed by both.
Then Grushenka suddenly felt sorry for them, and at dusk she went roundherself to their lodging. She found the two Poles in great poverty, almostdestitution, without food or fuel, without cigarettes, in debt to theirlandlady. The two hundred roubles they had carried off from Mitya atMokroe had soon disappeared. But Grushenka was surprised at their meetingher with arrogant dignity and self‐assertion, with the greatest punctilioand pompous speeches. Grushenka simply laughed, and gave her formeradmirer ten roubles. Then, laughing, she told Mitya of it and he was notin the least jealous. But ever since, the Poles had attached themselves toGrushenka and bombarded her daily with requests for money and she hadalways sent them small sums. And now that day Mitya had taken it into hishead to be fearfully jealous.
“Like a fool, I went round to him just for a minute, on the way to seeMitya, for he is ill, too, my Pole,” Grushenka began again with nervoushaste. “I was laughing, telling Mitya about it. ‘Fancy,’ I said, ‘my Polehad the happy thought to sing his old songs to me to the guitar. Hethought I would be touched and marry him!’ Mitya leapt up swearing.... So,there, I’ll send them the pies! Fenya, is it that little girl they’vesent? Here, give her three roubles and pack a dozen pies up in a paper andtell her to take them. And you, Alyosha, be sure to tell Mitya that I didsend them the pies.”
“I wouldn’t tell him for anything,” said Alyosha, smiling.
“Ech! You think he is unhappy about it. Why, he’s jealous on purpose. Hedoesn’t care,” said Grushenka bitterly.
“On purpose?” queried Alyosha.
“I tell you you are silly, Alyosha. You know nothing about it, with allyour cleverness. I am not offended that he is jealous of a girl like me. Iwould be offended if he were not jealous. I am like that. I am notoffended at jealousy. I have a fierce heart, too. I can be jealous myself.Only what offends me is that he doesn’t love me at all. I tell you he isjealous now _on purpose_. Am I blind? Don’t I see? He began talking to mejust now of that woman, of Katerina, saying she was this and that, how shehad ordered a doctor from Moscow for him, to try and save him; how she hadordered the best counsel, the most learned one, too. So he loves her, ifhe’ll praise her to my face, more shame to him! He’s treated me badlyhimself, so he attacked me, to make out I am in fault first and to throwit all on me. ‘You were with your Pole before me, so I can’t be blamed forKaterina,’ that’s what it amounts to. He wants to throw the whole blame onme. He attacked me on purpose, on purpose, I tell you, but I’ll—”
Grushenka could not finish saying what she would do. She hid her eyes inher handkerchief and sobbed violently.
“He doesn’t love Katerina Ivanovna,” said Alyosha firmly.
“Well, whether he loves her or not, I’ll soon find out for myself,” saidGrushenka, with a menacing note in her voice, taking the handkerchief fromher eyes. Her face was distorted. Alyosha saw sorrowfully that from beingmild and serene, it had become sullen and spiteful.
“Enough of this foolishness,” she said suddenly; “it’s not for that I sentfor you. Alyosha, darling, to‐morrow—what will happen to‐morrow? That’swhat worries me! And it’s only me it worries! I look at every one and noone is thinking of it. No one cares about it. Are you thinking about iteven? To‐morrow he’ll be tried, you know. Tell me, how will he be tried?You know it’s the valet, the valet killed him! Good heavens! Can theycondemn him in place of the valet and will no one stand up for him? Theyhaven’t troubled the valet at all, have they?”
“He’s been severely cross‐examined,” observed Alyosha thoughtfully; “butevery one came to the conclusion it was not he. Now he is lying very ill.He has been ill ever since that attack. Really ill,” added Alyosha.
“Oh, dear! couldn’t you go to that counsel yourself and tell him the wholething by yourself? He’s been brought from Petersburg for three thousandroubles, they say.”
“We gave these three thousand together—Ivan, Katerina Ivanovna and I—butshe paid two thousand for the doctor from Moscow herself. The counselFetyukovitch would have charged more, but the case has become known allover Russia; it’s talked of in all the papers and journals. Fetyukovitchagreed to come more for the glory of the thing, because the case hasbecome so notorious. I saw him yesterday.”
“Well? Did you talk to him?” Grushenka put in eagerly.
“He listened and said nothing. He told me that he had already formed hisopinion. But he promised to give my words consideration.”
“Consideration! Ah, they are swindlers! They’ll ruin him. And why did shesend for the doctor?”
“As an expert. They want to prove that Mitya’s mad and committed themurder when he didn’t know what he was doing”; Alyosha smiled gently; “butMitya won’t agree to that.”
“Yes; but that would be the truth if he had killed him!” cried Grushenka.“He was mad then, perfectly mad, and that was my fault, wretch that I am!But, of course, he didn’t do it, he didn’t do it! And they are all againsthim, the whole town. Even Fenya’s evidence went to prove he had done it.And the people at the shop, and that official, and at the tavern, too,before, people had heard him say so! They are all, all against him, allcrying out against him.”
“Yes, there’s a fearful accumulation of evidence,” Alyosha observedgrimly.
“And Grigory—Grigory Vassilyevitch—sticks to his story that the door wasopen, persists that he saw it—there’s no shaking him. I went and talked tohim myself. He’s rude about it, too.”
“Yes, that’s perhaps the strongest evidence against him,” said Alyosha.
“And as for Mitya’s being mad, he certainly seems like it now,” Grushenkabegan with a peculiarly anxious and mysterious air. “Do you know, Alyosha,I’ve been wanting to talk to you about it for a long time. I go to himevery day and simply wonder at him. Tell me, now, what do you suppose he’salways talking about? He talks and talks and I can make nothing of it. Ifancied he was talking of something intellectual that I couldn’tunderstand in my foolishness. Only he suddenly began talking to me about ababe—that is, about some child. ‘Why is the babe poor?’ he said. ‘It’s forthat babe I am going to Siberia now. I am not a murderer, but I must go toSiberia!’ What that meant, what babe, I couldn’t tell for the life of me.Only I cried when he said it, because he said it so nicely. He criedhimself, and I cried, too. He suddenly kissed me and made the sign of thecross over me. What did it mean, Alyosha, tell me? What is this babe?”
“It must be Rakitin, who’s been going to see him lately,” smiled Alyosha,“though ... that’s not Rakitin’s doing. I didn’t see Mitya yesterday. I’llsee him to‐day.”
“No, it’s not Rakitin; it’s his brother Ivan Fyodorovitch upsetting him.It’s his going to see him, that’s what it is,” Grushenka began, andsuddenly broke off. Alyosha gazed at her in amazement.
“Ivan’s going? Has he been to see him? Mitya told me himself that Ivanhasn’t been once.”
“There ... there! What a girl I am! Blurting things out!” exclaimedGrushenka, confused and suddenly blushing. “Stay, Alyosha, hush! SinceI’ve said so much I’ll tell the whole truth—he’s been to see him twice,the first directly he arrived. He galloped here from Moscow at once, ofcourse, before I was taken ill; and the second time was a week ago. Hetold Mitya not to tell you about it, under any circumstances; and not totell any one, in fact. He came secretly.”
Alyosha sat plunged in thought, considering something. The news evidentlyimpressed him.
“Ivan doesn’t talk to me of Mitya’s case,” he said slowly. “He’s said verylittle to me these last two months. And whenever I go to see him, he seemsvexed at my coming, so I’ve not been to him for the last three weeks.H’m!... if he was there a week ago ... there certainly has been a changein Mitya this week.”
“There has been a change,” Grushenka assented quickly. “They have asecret, they have a secret! Mitya told me himself there was a secret, andsuch a secret that Mitya can’t rest. Before then, he was cheerful—and,indeed, he is cheerful now—but when he shakes his head like that, youknow, and strides about the room and keeps pulling at the hair on hisright temple with his right hand, I know there is something on his mindworrying him.... I know! He was cheerful before, though, indeed, he ischeerful to‐day.”
“But you said he was worried.”
“Yes, he is worried and yet cheerful. He keeps on being irritable for aminute and then cheerful and then irritable again. And you know, Alyosha,I am constantly wondering at him—with this awful thing hanging over him,he sometimes laughs at such trifles as though he were a baby himself.”
“And did he really tell you not to tell me about Ivan? Did he say, ‘Don’ttell him’?”
“Yes, he told me, ‘Don’t tell him.’ It’s you that Mitya’s most afraid of.Because it’s a secret: he said himself it was a secret. Alyosha, darling,go to him and find out what their secret is and come and tell me,”Grushenka besought him with sudden eagerness. “Set my mind at rest that Imay know the worst that’s in store for me. That’s why I sent for you.”
“You think it’s something to do with you? If it were, he wouldn’t havetold you there was a secret.”
“I don’t know. Perhaps he wants to tell me, but doesn’t dare to. He warnsme. There is a secret, he tells me, but he won’t tell me what it is.”
“What do you think yourself?”
“What do I think? It’s the end for me, that’s what I think. They all threehave been plotting my end, for Katerina’s in it. It’s all Katerina, it allcomes from her. She is this and that, and that means that I am not. Hetells me that beforehand—warns me. He is planning to throw me over, that’sthe whole secret. They’ve planned it together, the three of them—Mitya,Katerina, and Ivan Fyodorovitch. Alyosha, I’ve been wanting to ask you along time. A week ago he suddenly told me that Ivan was in love withKaterina, because he often goes to see her. Did he tell me the truth ornot? Tell me, on your conscience, tell me the worst.”
“I won’t tell you a lie. Ivan is not in love with Katerina Ivanovna, Ithink.”
“Oh, that’s what I thought! He is lying to me, shameless deceiver, that’swhat it is! And he was jealous of me just now, so as to put the blame onme afterwards. He is stupid, he can’t disguise what he is doing; he is soopen, you know.... But I’ll give it to him, I’ll give it to him! ‘Youbelieve I did it,’ he said. He said that to me, to me. He reproached mewith that! God forgive him! You wait, I’ll make it hot for Katerina at thetrial! I’ll just say a word then ... I’ll tell everything then!”
And again she cried bitterly.
“This I can tell you for certain, Grushenka,” Alyosha said, getting up.“First, that he loves you, loves you more than any one in the world, andyou only, believe me. I know. I do know. The second thing is that I don’twant to worm his secret out of him, but if he’ll tell me of himself to‐day, I shall tell him straight out that I have promised to tell you. ThenI’ll come to you to‐day, and tell you. Only ... I fancy ... KaterinaIvanovna has nothing to do with it, and that the secret is about somethingelse. That’s certain. It isn’t likely it’s about Katerina Ivanovna, itseems to me. Good‐by for now.”
Alyosha shook hands with her. Grushenka was still crying. He saw that sheput little faith in his consolation, but she was better for having had hersorrow out, for having spoken of it. He was sorry to leave her in such astate of mind, but he was in haste. He had a great many things to dostill.


Chapter II. The Injured Foot

The first of these things was at the house of Madame Hohlakov, and hehurried there to get it over as quickly as possible and not be too latefor Mitya. Madame Hohlakov had been slightly ailing for the last threeweeks: her foot had for some reason swollen up, and though she was not inbed, she lay all day half‐reclining on the couch in her boudoir, in afascinating but decorous _déshabillé_. Alyosha had once noted withinnocent amusement that, in spite of her illness, Madame Hohlakov hadbegun to be rather dressy—top‐knots, ribbons, loose wrappers, had madetheir appearance, and he had an inkling of the reason, though he dismissedsuch ideas from his mind as frivolous. During the last two months theyoung official, Perhotin, had become a regular visitor at the house.
Alyosha had not called for four days and he was in haste to go straight toLise, as it was with her he had to speak, for Lise had sent a maid to himthe previous day, specially asking him to come to her “about somethingvery important,” a request which, for certain reasons, had interest forAlyosha. But while the maid went to take his name in to Lise, MadameHohlakov heard of his arrival from some one, and immediately sent to beghim to come to her “just for one minute.” Alyosha reflected that it wasbetter to accede to the mamma’s request, or else she would be sending downto Lise’s room every minute that he was there. Madame Hohlakov was lyingon a couch. She was particularly smartly dressed and was evidently in astate of extreme nervous excitement. She greeted Alyosha with cries ofrapture.
“It’s ages, ages, perfect ages since I’ve seen you! It’s a whole week—onlythink of it! Ah, but you were here only four days ago, on Wednesday. Youhave come to see Lise. I’m sure you meant to slip into her room on tiptoe,without my hearing you. My dear, dear Alexey Fyodorovitch, if you onlyknew how worried I am about her! But of that later, though that’s the mostimportant thing, of that later. Dear Alexey Fyodorovitch, I trust youimplicitly with my Lise. Since the death of Father Zossima—God rest hissoul!” (she crossed herself)—“I look upon you as a monk, though you lookcharming in your new suit. Where did you find such a tailor in theseparts? No, no, that’s not the chief thing—of that later. Forgive me forsometimes calling you Alyosha; an old woman like me may take liberties,”she smiled coquettishly; “but that will do later, too. The important thingis that I shouldn’t forget what is important. Please remind me of ityourself. As soon as my tongue runs away with me, you just say ‘theimportant thing?’ Ach! how do I know now what is of most importance? Eversince Lise took back her promise—her childish promise, AlexeyFyodorovitch—to marry you, you’ve realized, of course, that it was onlythe playful fancy of a sick child who had been so long confined to herchair—thank God, she can walk now!... that new doctor Katya sent for fromMoscow for your unhappy brother, who will to‐morrow—But why speak of to‐morrow? I am ready to die at the very thought of to‐morrow. Ready to dieof curiosity.... That doctor was with us yesterday and saw Lise.... I paidhim fifty roubles for the visit. But that’s not the point, that’s not thepoint again. You see, I’m mixing everything up. I am in such a hurry. Whyam I in a hurry? I don’t understand. It’s awful how I seem growing unableto understand anything. Everything seems mixed up in a sort of tangle. Iam afraid you are so bored you will jump up and run away, and that will beall I shall see of you. Goodness! Why are we sitting here and no coffee?Yulia, Glafira, coffee!”
Alyosha made haste to thank her, and said that he had only just hadcoffee.
“Where?”
“At Agrafena Alexandrovna’s.”
“At ... at that woman’s? Ah, it’s she has brought ruin on every one. Iknow nothing about it though. They say she has become a saint, though it’srather late in the day. She had better have done it before. What use is itnow? Hush, hush, Alexey Fyodorovitch, for I have so much to say to youthat I am afraid I shall tell you nothing. This awful trial ... I shallcertainly go, I am making arrangements. I shall be carried there in mychair; besides I can sit up. I shall have people with me. And, you know, Iam a witness. How shall I speak, how shall I speak? I don’t know what Ishall say. One has to take an oath, hasn’t one?”
“Yes; but I don’t think you will be able to go.”
“I can sit up. Ah, you put me out! Ah! this trial, this savage act, andthen they are all going to Siberia, some are getting married, and all thisso quickly, so quickly, everything’s changing, and at last—nothing. Allgrow old and have death to look forward to. Well, so be it! I am weary.This Katya, _cette charmante personne_, has disappointed all my hopes. Nowshe is going to follow one of your brothers to Siberia, and your otherbrother is going to follow her, and will live in the nearest town, andthey will all torment one another. It drives me out of my mind. Worst ofall—the publicity. The story has been told a million times over in all thepapers in Moscow and Petersburg. Ah! yes, would you believe it, there’s aparagraph that I was ‘a dear friend’ of your brother’s ——, I can’t repeatthe horrid word. Just fancy, just fancy!”
“Impossible! Where was the paragraph? What did it say?”
“I’ll show you directly. I got the paper and read it yesterday. Here, inthe Petersburg paper _Gossip_. The paper began coming out this year. I amawfully fond of gossip, and I take it in, and now it pays me out—this iswhat gossip comes to! Here it is, here, this passage. Read it.”
And she handed Alyosha a sheet of newspaper which had been under herpillow.
It was not exactly that she was upset, she seemed overwhelmed and perhapseverything really was mixed up in a tangle in her head. The paragraph wasvery typical, and must have been a great shock to her, but, fortunatelyperhaps, she was unable to keep her mind fixed on any one subject at thatmoment, and so might race off in a minute to something else and quiteforget the newspaper.
Alyosha was well aware that the story of the terrible case had spread allover Russia. And, good heavens! what wild rumors about his brother, aboutthe Karamazovs, and about himself he had read in the course of those twomonths, among other equally credible items! One paper had even stated thathe had gone into a monastery and become a monk, in horror at his brother’scrime. Another contradicted this, and stated that he and his elder, FatherZossima, had broken into the monastery chest and “made tracks from themonastery.” The present paragraph in the paper _Gossip_ was under theheading, “The Karamazov Case at Skotoprigonyevsk.” (That, alas! was thename of our little town. I had hitherto kept it concealed.) It was brief,and Madame Hohlakov was not directly mentioned in it. No names appeared,in fact. It was merely stated that the criminal, whose approaching trialwas making such a sensation—retired army captain, an idle swaggerer, andreactionary bully—was continually involved in amorous intrigues, andparticularly popular with certain ladies “who were pining in solitude.”One such lady, a pining widow, who tried to seem young though she had agrown‐up daughter, was so fascinated by him that only two hours before thecrime she offered him three thousand roubles, on condition that he wouldelope with her to the gold mines. But the criminal, counting on escapingpunishment, had preferred to murder his father to get the three thousandrather than go off to Siberia with the middle‐aged charms of his pininglady. This playful paragraph finished, of course, with an outburst ofgenerous indignation at the wickedness of parricide and at the latelyabolished institution of serfdom. Reading it with curiosity, Alyoshafolded up the paper and handed it back to Madame Hohlakov.
“Well, that must be me,” she hurried on again. “Of course I am meant.Scarcely more than an hour before, I suggested gold mines to him, and herethey talk of ‘middle‐aged charms’ as though that were my motive! He writesthat out of spite! God Almighty forgive him for the middle‐aged charms, asI forgive him! You know it’s— Do you know who it is? It’s your friendRakitin.”
“Perhaps,” said Alyosha, “though I’ve heard nothing about it.”
“It’s he, it’s he! No ‘perhaps’ about it. You know I turned him out of thehouse.... You know all that story, don’t you?”
“I know that you asked him not to visit you for the future, but why itwas, I haven’t heard ... from you, at least.”
“Ah, then you’ve heard it from him! He abuses me, I suppose, abuses medreadfully?”
“Yes, he does; but then he abuses every one. But why you’ve given him up Ihaven’t heard from him either. I meet him very seldom now, indeed. We arenot friends.”
“Well, then, I’ll tell you all about it. There’s no help for it, I’llconfess, for there is one point in which I was perhaps to blame. Only alittle, little point, so little that perhaps it doesn’t count. You see, mydear boy”—Madame Hohlakov suddenly looked arch and a charming, thoughenigmatic, smile played about her lips—“you see, I suspect ... You mustforgive me, Alyosha. I am like a mother to you.... No, no; quite thecontrary. I speak to you now as though you were my father—mother’s quiteout of place. Well, it’s as though I were confessing to Father Zossima,that’s just it. I called you a monk just now. Well, that poor young man,your friend, Rakitin (Mercy on us! I can’t be angry with him. I feelcross, but not very), that frivolous young man, would you believe it,seems to have taken it into his head to fall in love with me. I onlynoticed it later. At first—a month ago—he only began to come oftener tosee me, almost every day; though, of course, we were acquainted before. Iknew nothing about it ... and suddenly it dawned upon me, and I began tonotice things with surprise. You know, two months ago, that modest,charming, excellent young man, Pyotr Ilyitch Perhotin, who’s in theservice here, began to be a regular visitor at the house. You met him hereever so many times yourself. And he is an excellent, earnest young man,isn’t he? He comes once every three days, not every day (though I shouldbe glad to see him every day), and always so well dressed. Altogether, Ilove young people, Alyosha, talented, modest, like you, and he has almostthe mind of a statesman, he talks so charmingly, and I shall certainly,certainly try and get promotion for him. He is a future diplomat. On thatawful day he almost saved me from death by coming in the night. And yourfriend Rakitin comes in such boots, and always stretches them out on thecarpet.... He began hinting at his feelings, in fact, and one day, as hewas going, he squeezed my hand terribly hard. My foot began to swelldirectly after he pressed my hand like that. He had met Pyotr Ilyitch herebefore, and would you believe it, he is always gibing at him, growling athim, for some reason. I simply looked at the way they went on together andlaughed inwardly. So I was sitting here alone—no, I was laid up then.Well, I was lying here alone and suddenly Rakitin comes in, and onlyfancy! brought me some verses of his own composition—a short poem, on mybad foot: that is, he described my foot in a poem. Wait a minute—how didit go?

    A captivating little foot.

It began somehow like that. I can never remember poetry. I’ve got it here.I’ll show it to you later. But it’s a charming thing—charming; and, youknow, it’s not only about the foot, it had a good moral, too, a charmingidea, only I’ve forgotten it; in fact, it was just the thing for an album.So, of course, I thanked him, and he was evidently flattered. I’d hardlyhad time to thank him when in comes Pyotr Ilyitch, and Rakitin suddenlylooked as black as night. I could see that Pyotr Ilyitch was in the way,for Rakitin certainly wanted to say something after giving me the verses.I had a presentiment of it; but Pyotr Ilyitch came in. I showed PyotrIlyitch the verses and didn’t say who was the author. But I am convincedthat he guessed, though he won’t own it to this day, and declares he hadno idea. But he says that on purpose. Pyotr Ilyitch began to laugh atonce, and fell to criticizing it. ‘Wretched doggerel,’ he said they were,‘some divinity student must have written them,’ and with such vehemence,such vehemence! Then, instead of laughing, your friend flew into a rage.‘Good gracious!’ I thought, ‘they’ll fly at each other.’ ‘It was I whowrote them,’ said he. ‘I wrote them as a joke,’ he said, ‘for I think itdegrading to write verses.... But they are good poetry. They want to put amonument to your Pushkin for writing about women’s feet, while I wrotewith a moral purpose, and you,’ said he, ‘are an advocate of serfdom.You’ve no humane ideas,’ said he. ‘You have no modern enlightenedfeelings, you are uninfluenced by progress, you are a mere official,’ hesaid, ‘and you take bribes.’ Then I began screaming and imploring them.And, you know, Pyotr Ilyitch is anything but a coward. He at once took upthe most gentlemanly tone, looked at him sarcastically, listened, andapologized. ‘I’d no idea,’ said he. ‘I shouldn’t have said it, if I hadknown. I should have praised it. Poets are all so irritable,’ he said. Inshort, he laughed at him under cover of the most gentlemanly tone. Heexplained to me afterwards that it was all sarcastic. I thought he was inearnest. Only as I lay there, just as before you now, I thought, ‘Wouldit, or would it not, be the proper thing for me to turn Rakitin out forshouting so rudely at a visitor in my house?’ And, would you believe it, Ilay here, shut my eyes, and wondered, would it be the proper thing or not.I kept worrying and worrying, and my heart began to beat, and I couldn’tmake up my mind whether to make an outcry or not. One voice seemed to betelling me, ‘Speak,’ and the other ‘No, don’t speak.’ And no sooner hadthe second voice said that than I cried out, and fainted. Of course, therewas a fuss. I got up suddenly and said to Rakitin, ‘It’s painful for me tosay it, but I don’t wish to see you in my house again.’ So I turned himout. Ah! Alexey Fyodorovitch, I know myself I did wrong. I was putting iton. I wasn’t angry with him at all, really; but I suddenly fancied—thatwas what did it—that it would be such a fine scene.... And yet, believeme, it was quite natural, for I really shed tears and cried for severaldays afterwards, and then suddenly, one afternoon, I forgot all about it.So it’s a fortnight since he’s been here, and I kept wondering whether hewould come again. I wondered even yesterday, then suddenly last night camethis _Gossip_. I read it and gasped. Who could have written it? He musthave written it. He went home, sat down, wrote it on the spot, sent it,and they put it in. It was a fortnight ago, you see. But, Alyosha, it’sawful how I keep talking and don’t say what I want to say. Ah! the wordscome of themselves!”
“It’s very important for me to be in time to see my brother to‐day,”Alyosha faltered.
“To be sure, to be sure! You bring it all back to me. Listen, what is anaberration?”
“What aberration?” asked Alyosha, wondering.
“In the legal sense. An aberration in which everything is pardonable.Whatever you do, you will be acquitted at once.”
“What do you mean?”
“I’ll tell you. This Katya ... Ah! she is a charming, charming creature,only I never can make out who it is she is in love with. She was with mesome time ago and I couldn’t get anything out of her. Especially as shewon’t talk to me except on the surface now. She is always talking about myhealth and nothing else, and she takes up such a tone with me, too. Isimply said to myself, ‘Well, so be it. I don’t care’... Oh, yes. I wastalking of aberration. This doctor has come. You know a doctor has come?Of course, you know it—the one who discovers madmen. You wrote for him.No, it wasn’t you, but Katya. It’s all Katya’s doing. Well, you see, a manmay be sitting perfectly sane and suddenly have an aberration. He may beconscious and know what he is doing and yet be in a state of aberration.And there’s no doubt that Dmitri Fyodorovitch was suffering fromaberration. They found out about aberration as soon as the law courts werereformed. It’s all the good effect of the reformed law courts. The doctorhas been here and questioned me about that evening, about the gold mines.‘How did he seem then?’ he asked me. He must have been in a state ofaberration. He came in shouting, ‘Money, money, three thousand! Give methree thousand!’ and then went away and immediately did the murder. ‘Idon’t want to murder him,’ he said, and he suddenly went and murdered him.That’s why they’ll acquit him, because he struggled against it and yet hemurdered him.”
“But he didn’t murder him,” Alyosha interrupted rather sharply. He feltmore and more sick with anxiety and impatience.
“Yes, I know it was that old man Grigory murdered him.”
“Grigory?” cried Alyosha.
“Yes, yes; it was Grigory. He lay as Dmitri Fyodorovitch struck him down,and then got up, saw the door open, went in and killed Fyodor Pavlovitch.”
“But why, why?”
“Suffering from aberration. When he recovered from the blow DmitriFyodorovitch gave him on the head, he was suffering from aberration; hewent and committed the murder. As for his saying he didn’t, he very likelydoesn’t remember. Only, you know, it’ll be better, ever so much better, ifDmitri Fyodorovitch murdered him. And that’s how it must have been, thoughI say it was Grigory. It certainly was Dmitri Fyodorovitch, and that’sbetter, ever so much better! Oh! not better that a son should have killedhis father, I don’t defend that. Children ought to honor their parents,and yet it would be better if it were he, as you’d have nothing to cryover then, for he did it when he was unconscious or rather when he wasconscious, but did not know what he was doing. Let them acquit him—that’sso humane, and would show what a blessing reformed law courts are. I knewnothing about it, but they say they have been so a long time. And when Iheard it yesterday, I was so struck by it that I wanted to send for you atonce. And if he is acquitted, make him come straight from the law courtsto dinner with me, and I’ll have a party of friends, and we’ll drink tothe reformed law courts. I don’t believe he’d be dangerous; besides, I’llinvite a great many friends, so that he could always be led out if he didanything. And then he might be made a justice of the peace or something inanother town, for those who have been in trouble themselves make the bestjudges. And, besides, who isn’t suffering from aberration nowadays?—you,I, all of us are in a state of aberration, and there are ever so manyexamples of it: a man sits singing a song, suddenly something annoys him,he takes a pistol and shoots the first person he comes across, and no oneblames him for it. I read that lately, and all the doctors confirm it. Thedoctors are always confirming; they confirm anything. Why, my Lise is in astate of aberration. She made me cry again yesterday, and the day before,too, and to‐day I suddenly realized that it’s all due to aberration. Oh,Lise grieves me so! I believe she’s quite mad. Why did she send for you?Did she send for you or did you come of yourself?”
“Yes, she sent for me, and I am just going to her.” Alyosha got upresolutely.
“Oh, my dear, dear Alexey Fyodorovitch, perhaps that’s what’s mostimportant,” Madame Hohlakov cried, suddenly bursting into tears. “Godknows I trust Lise to you with all my heart, and it’s no matter hersending for you on the sly, without telling her mother. But forgive me, Ican’t trust my daughter so easily to your brother Ivan Fyodorovitch,though I still consider him the most chivalrous young man. But only fancy,he’s been to see Lise and I knew nothing about it!”
“How? What? When?” Alyosha was exceedingly surprised. He had not sat downagain and listened standing.
“I will tell you; that’s perhaps why I asked you to come, for I don’t knownow why I did ask you to come. Well, Ivan Fyodorovitch has been to see metwice, since he came back from Moscow. First time he came as a friend tocall on me, and the second time Katya was here and he came because heheard she was here. I didn’t, of course, expect him to come often, knowingwhat a lot he has to do as it is, _vous comprenez, cette affaire et lamort terrible de votre papa_. But I suddenly heard he’d been here again,not to see me but to see Lise. That’s six days ago now. He came, stayedfive minutes, and went away. And I didn’t hear of it till three daysafterwards, from Glafira, so it was a great shock to me. I sent for Lisedirectly. She laughed. ‘He thought you were asleep,’ she said, ‘and camein to me to ask after your health.’ Of course, that’s how it happened. ButLise, Lise, mercy on us, how she distresses me! Would you believe it, onenight, four days ago, just after you saw her last time, and had gone away,she suddenly had a fit, screaming, shrieking, hysterics! Why is it I neverhave hysterics? Then, next day another fit, and the same thing on thethird, and yesterday too, and then yesterday that aberration. She suddenlyscreamed out, ‘I hate Ivan Fyodorovitch. I insist on your never lettinghim come to the house again.’ I was struck dumb at these amazing words,and answered, ‘On what grounds could I refuse to see such an excellentyoung man, a young man of such learning too, and so unfortunate?’—for allthis business is a misfortune, isn’t it? She suddenly burst out laughingat my words, and so rudely, you know. Well, I was pleased; I thought I hadamused her and the fits would pass off, especially as I wanted to refuseto see Ivan Fyodorovitch anyway on account of his strange visits withoutmy knowledge, and meant to ask him for an explanation. But early thismorning Lise waked up and flew into a passion with Yulia and, would youbelieve it, slapped her in the face. That’s monstrous; I am always politeto my servants. And an hour later she was hugging Yulia’s feet and kissingthem. She sent a message to me that she wasn’t coming to me at all, andwould never come and see me again, and when I dragged myself down to her,she rushed to kiss me, crying, and as she kissed me, she pushed me out ofthe room without saying a word, so I couldn’t find out what was thematter. Now, dear Alexey Fyodorovitch, I rest all my hopes on you, and, ofcourse, my whole life is in your hands. I simply beg you to go to Lise andfind out everything from her, as you alone can, and come back and tellme—me, her mother, for you understand it will be the death of me, simplythe death of me, if this goes on, or else I shall run away. I can stand nomore. I have patience; but I may lose patience, and then ... thensomething awful will happen. Ah, dear me! At last, Pyotr Ilyitch!” criedMadame Hohlakov, beaming all over as she saw Perhotin enter the room. “Youare late, you are late! Well, sit down, speak, put us out of suspense.What does the counsel say. Where are you off to, Alexey Fyodorovitch?”
“To Lise.”
“Oh, yes. You won’t forget, you won’t forget what I asked you? It’s aquestion of life and death!”
“Of course, I won’t forget, if I can ... but I am so late,” mutteredAlyosha, beating a hasty retreat.
“No, be sure, be sure to come in; don’t say ‘If you can.’ I shall die ifyou don’t,” Madame Hohlakov called after him, but Alyosha had already leftthe room.


Chapter III. A Little Demon

Going in to Lise, he found her half reclining in the invalid‐chair, inwhich she had been wheeled when she was unable to walk. She did not moveto meet him, but her sharp, keen eyes were simply riveted on his face.There was a feverish look in her eyes, her face was pale and yellow.Alyosha was amazed at the change that had taken place in her in threedays. She was positively thinner. She did not hold out her hand to him. Hetouched the thin, long fingers which lay motionless on her dress, then hesat down facing her, without a word.
“I know you are in a hurry to get to the prison,” Lise said curtly, “andmamma’s kept you there for hours; she’s just been telling you about me andYulia.”
“How do you know?” asked Alyosha.
“I’ve been listening. Why do you stare at me? I want to listen and I dolisten, there’s no harm in that. I don’t apologize.”
“You are upset about something?”
“On the contrary, I am very happy. I’ve only just been reflecting for thethirtieth time what a good thing it is I refused you and shall not be yourwife. You are not fit to be a husband. If I were to marry you and give youa note to take to the man I loved after you, you’d take it and be sure togive it to him and bring an answer back, too. If you were forty, you wouldstill go on taking my love‐letters for me.”
She suddenly laughed.
“There is something spiteful and yet open‐hearted about you,” Alyoshasmiled to her.
“The open‐heartedness consists in my not being ashamed of myself with you.What’s more, I don’t want to feel ashamed with you, just with you.Alyosha, why is it I don’t respect you? I am very fond of you, but I don’trespect you. If I respected you, I shouldn’t talk to you without shame,should I?”
“No.”
“But do you believe that I am not ashamed with you?”
“No, I don’t believe it.”
Lise laughed nervously again; she spoke rapidly.
“I sent your brother, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, some sweets in prison. Alyosha,you know, you are quite pretty! I shall love you awfully for having soquickly allowed me not to love you.”
“Why did you send for me to‐day, Lise?”
“I wanted to tell you of a longing I have. I should like some one totorture me, marry me and then torture me, deceive me and go away. I don’twant to be happy.”
“You are in love with disorder?”
“Yes, I want disorder. I keep wanting to set fire to the house. I keepimagining how I’ll creep up and set fire to the house on the sly; it mustbe on the sly. They’ll try to put it out, but it’ll go on burning. And Ishall know and say nothing. Ah, what silliness! And how bored I am!”
She waved her hand with a look of repulsion.
“It’s your luxurious life,” said Alyosha, softly.
“Is it better, then, to be poor?”
“Yes, it is better.”
“That’s what your monk taught you. That’s not true. Let me be rich and allthe rest poor, I’ll eat sweets and drink cream and not give any to any oneelse. Ach, don’t speak, don’t say anything,” she shook her hand at him,though Alyosha had not opened his mouth. “You’ve told me all that before,I know it all by heart. It bores me. If I am ever poor, I shall murdersomebody, and even if I am rich, I may murder some one, perhaps—why donothing! But do you know, I should like to reap, cut the rye? I’ll marryyou, and you shall become a peasant, a real peasant; we’ll keep a colt,shall we? Do you know Kalganov?”
“Yes.”
“He is always wandering about, dreaming. He says, ‘Why live in real life?It’s better to dream. One can dream the most delightful things, but reallife is a bore.’ But he’ll be married soon for all that; he’s been makinglove to me already. Can you spin tops?”
“Yes.”
“Well, he’s just like a top: he wants to be wound up and set spinning andthen to be lashed, lashed, lashed with a whip. If I marry him, I’ll keephim spinning all his life. You are not ashamed to be with me?”
“No.”
“You are awfully cross, because I don’t talk about holy things. I don’twant to be holy. What will they do to one in the next world for thegreatest sin? You must know all about that.”
“God will censure you.” Alyosha was watching her steadily.
“That’s just what I should like. I would go up and they would censure me,and I would burst out laughing in their faces. I should dreadfully like toset fire to the house, Alyosha, to our house; you still don’t believe me?”
“Why? There are children of twelve years old, who have a longing to setfire to something and they do set things on fire, too. It’s a sort ofdisease.”
“That’s not true, that’s not true; there may be children, but that’s notwhat I mean.”
“You take evil for good; it’s a passing crisis, it’s the result of yourillness, perhaps.”
“You do despise me, though! It’s simply that I don’t want to do good, Iwant to do evil, and it has nothing to do with illness.”
“Why do evil?”
“So that everything might be destroyed. Ah, how nice it would be ifeverything were destroyed! You know, Alyosha, I sometimes think of doing afearful lot of harm and everything bad, and I should do it for a longwhile on the sly and suddenly every one would find it out. Every one willstand round and point their fingers at me and I would look at them all.That would be awfully nice. Why would it be so nice, Alyosha?”
“I don’t know. It’s a craving to destroy something good or, as you say, toset fire to something. It happens sometimes.”
“I not only say it, I shall do it.”
“I believe you.”
“Ah, how I love you for saying you believe me. And you are not lying onelittle bit. But perhaps you think that I am saying all this on purpose toannoy you?”
“No, I don’t think that ... though perhaps there is a little desire to dothat in it, too.”
“There is a little. I never can tell lies to you,” she declared, with astrange fire in her eyes.
What struck Alyosha above everything was her earnestness. There was not atrace of humor or jesting in her face now, though, in old days, fun andgayety never deserted her even at her most “earnest” moments.
“There are moments when people love crime,” said Alyosha thoughtfully.
“Yes, yes! You have uttered my thought; they love crime, every one lovescrime, they love it always, not at some ‘moments.’ You know, it’s asthough people have made an agreement to lie about it and have lied aboutit ever since. They all declare that they hate evil, but secretly they alllove it.”
“And are you still reading nasty books?”
“Yes, I am. Mamma reads them and hides them under her pillow and I stealthem.”
“Aren’t you ashamed to destroy yourself?”
“I want to destroy myself. There’s a boy here, who lay down between therailway lines when the train was passing. Lucky fellow! Listen, yourbrother is being tried now for murdering his father and every one loveshis having killed his father.”
“Loves his having killed his father?”
“Yes, loves it; every one loves it! Everybody says it’s so awful, butsecretly they simply love it. I for one love it.”
“There is some truth in what you say about every one,” said Alyoshasoftly.
“Oh, what ideas you have!” Lise shrieked in delight. “And you a monk, too!You wouldn’t believe how I respect you, Alyosha, for never telling lies.Oh, I must tell you a funny dream of mine. I sometimes dream of devils.It’s night; I am in my room with a candle and suddenly there are devilsall over the place, in all the corners, under the table, and they open thedoors; there’s a crowd of them behind the doors and they want to come andseize me. And they are just coming, just seizing me. But I suddenly crossmyself and they all draw back, though they don’t go away altogether, theystand at the doors and in the corners, waiting. And suddenly I have afrightful longing to revile God aloud, and so I begin, and then they comecrowding back to me, delighted, and seize me again and I cross myselfagain and they all draw back. It’s awful fun. it takes one’s breath away.”
“I’ve had the same dream, too,” said Alyosha suddenly.
“Really?” cried Lise, surprised. “I say, Alyosha, don’t laugh, that’sawfully important. Could two different people have the same dream?”
“It seems they can.”
“Alyosha, I tell you, it’s awfully important,” Lise went on, with reallyexcessive amazement. “It’s not the dream that’s important, but your havingthe same dream as me. You never lie to me, don’t lie now: is it true? Youare not laughing?”
“It’s true.”
Lise seemed extraordinarily impressed and for half a minute she wassilent.
“Alyosha, come and see me, come and see me more often,” she said suddenly,in a supplicating voice.
“I’ll always come to see you, all my life,” answered Alyosha firmly.
“You are the only person I can talk to, you know,” Lise began again. “Italk to no one but myself and you. Only you in the whole world. And to youmore readily than to myself. And I am not a bit ashamed with you, not abit. Alyosha, why am I not ashamed with you, not a bit? Alyosha, is ittrue that at Easter the Jews steal a child and kill it?”
“I don’t know.”
“There’s a book here in which I read about the trial of a Jew, who took achild of four years old and cut off the fingers from both hands, and thencrucified him on the wall, hammered nails into him and crucified him, andafterwards, when he was tried, he said that the child died soon, withinfour hours. That was ‘soon’! He said the child moaned, kept on moaning andhe stood admiring it. That’s nice!”
“Nice?”
“Nice; I sometimes imagine that it was I who crucified him. He would hangthere moaning and I would sit opposite him eating pineapple _compote_. Iam awfully fond of pineapple _compote_. Do you like it?”
Alyosha looked at her in silence. Her pale, sallow face was suddenlycontorted, her eyes burned.
“You know, when I read about that Jew I shook with sobs all night. I keptfancying how the little thing cried and moaned (a child of four years oldunderstands, you know), and all the while the thought of pineapple_compote_ haunted me. In the morning I wrote a letter to a certain person,begging him _particularly_ to come and see me. He came and I suddenly toldhim all about the child and the pineapple _compote_. _All_ about it,_all_, and said that it was nice. He laughed and said it really was nice.Then he got up and went away. He was only here five minutes. Did hedespise me? Did he despise me? Tell me, tell me, Alyosha, did he despiseme or not?” She sat up on the couch, with flashing eyes.
“Tell me,” Alyosha asked anxiously, “did you send for that person?”
“Yes, I did.”
“Did you send him a letter?”
“Yes.”
“Simply to ask about that, about that child?”
“No, not about that at all. But when he came, I asked him about that atonce. He answered, laughed, got up and went away.”
“That person behaved honorably,” Alyosha murmured.
“And did he despise me? Did he laugh at me?”
“No, for perhaps he believes in the pineapple _compote_ himself. He isvery ill now, too, Lise.”
“Yes, he does believe in it,” said Lise, with flashing eyes.
“He doesn’t despise any one,” Alyosha went on. “Only he does not believeany one. If he doesn’t believe in people, of course, he does despisethem.”
“Then he despises me, me?”
“You, too.”
“Good,” Lise seemed to grind her teeth. “When he went out laughing, I feltthat it was nice to be despised. The child with fingers cut off is nice,and to be despised is nice....”
And she laughed in Alyosha’s face, a feverish malicious laugh.
“Do you know, Alyosha, do you know, I should like—Alyosha, save me!” Shesuddenly jumped from the couch, rushed to him and seized him with bothhands. “Save me!” she almost groaned. “Is there any one in the world Icould tell what I’ve told you? I’ve told you the truth, the truth. I shallkill myself, because I loathe everything! I don’t want to live, because Iloathe everything! I loathe everything, everything. Alyosha, why don’t youlove me in the least?” she finished in a frenzy.
“But I do love you!” answered Alyosha warmly.
“And will you weep over me, will you?”
“Yes.”
“Not because I won’t be your wife, but simply weep for me?”
“Yes.”
“Thank you! It’s only your tears I want. Every one else may punish me andtrample me under foot, every one, every one, not excepting _any one_. ForI don’t love any one. Do you hear, not any one! On the contrary, I hatehim! Go, Alyosha; it’s time you went to your brother”; she tore herselfaway from him suddenly.
“How can I leave you like this?” said Alyosha, almost in alarm.
“Go to your brother, the prison will be shut; go, here’s your hat. Give mylove to Mitya, go, go!”
And she almost forcibly pushed Alyosha out of the door. He looked at herwith pained surprise, when he was suddenly aware of a letter in his righthand, a tiny letter folded up tight and sealed. He glanced at it andinstantly read the address, “To Ivan Fyodorovitch Karamazov.” He lookedquickly at Lise. Her face had become almost menacing.
“Give it to him, you must give it to him!” she ordered him, trembling andbeside herself. “To‐day, at once, or I’ll poison myself! That’s why I sentfor you.”
And she slammed the door quickly. The bolt clicked. Alyosha put the notein his pocket and went straight downstairs, without going back to MadameHohlakov; forgetting her, in fact. As soon as Alyosha had gone, Liseunbolted the door, opened it a little, put her finger in the crack andslammed the door with all her might, pinching her finger. Ten secondsafter, releasing her finger, she walked softly, slowly to her chair, satup straight in it and looked intently at her blackened finger and at theblood that oozed from under the nail. Her lips were quivering and she keptwhispering rapidly to herself:
“I am a wretch, wretch, wretch, wretch!”


Chapter IV. A Hymn And A Secret

It was quite late (days are short in November) when Alyosha rang at theprison gate. It was beginning to get dusk. But Alyosha knew that he wouldbe admitted without difficulty. Things were managed in our little town, aseverywhere else. At first, of course, on the conclusion of the preliminaryinquiry, relations and a few other persons could only obtain interviewswith Mitya by going through certain inevitable formalities. But later,though the formalities were not relaxed, exceptions were made for some, atleast, of Mitya’s visitors. So much so, that sometimes the interviews withthe prisoner in the room set aside for the purpose were practically_tête‐à‐tête_.
These exceptions, however, were few in number; only Grushenka, Alyosha andRakitin were treated like this. But the captain of the police, MihailMihailovitch, was very favorably disposed to Grushenka. His abuse of herat Mokroe weighed on the old man’s conscience, and when he learned thewhole story, he completely changed his view of her. And strange to say,though he was firmly persuaded of his guilt, yet after Mitya was once inprison, the old man came to take a more and more lenient view of him. “Hewas a man of good heart, perhaps,” he thought, “who had come to grief fromdrinking and dissipation.” His first horror had been succeeded by pity. Asfor Alyosha, the police captain was very fond of him and had known him fora long time. Rakitin, who had of late taken to coming very often to seethe prisoner, was one of the most intimate acquaintances of the “policecaptain’s young ladies,” as he called them, and was always hanging abouttheir house. He gave lessons in the house of the prison superintendent,too, who, though scrupulous in the performance of his duties, was a kind‐hearted old man. Alyosha, again, had an intimate acquaintance of longstanding with the superintendent, who was fond of talking to him,generally on sacred subjects. He respected Ivan Fyodorovitch, and stood inawe of his opinion, though he was a great philosopher himself; “self‐taught,” of course. But Alyosha had an irresistible attraction for him.During the last year the old man had taken to studying the ApocryphalGospels, and constantly talked over his impressions with his young friend.He used to come and see him in the monastery and discussed for hourstogether with him and with the monks. So even if Alyosha were late at theprison, he had only to go to the superintendent and everything was madeeasy. Besides, every one in the prison, down to the humblest warder, hadgrown used to Alyosha. The sentry, of course, did not trouble him so longas the authorities were satisfied.
When Mitya was summoned from his cell, he always went downstairs, to theplace set aside for interviews. As Alyosha entered the room he came uponRakitin, who was just taking leave of Mitya. They were both talkingloudly. Mitya was laughing heartily as he saw him out, while Rakitinseemed grumbling. Rakitin did not like meeting Alyosha, especially oflate. He scarcely spoke to him, and bowed to him stiffly. Seeing Alyoshaenter now, he frowned and looked away, as though he were entirely absorbedin buttoning his big, warm, fur‐trimmed overcoat. Then he began looking atonce for his umbrella.
“I must mind not to forget my belongings,” he muttered, simply to saysomething.
“Mind you don’t forget other people’s belongings,” said Mitya, as a joke,and laughed at once at his own wit. Rakitin fired up instantly.
“You’d better give that advice to your own family, who’ve always been aslave‐driving lot, and not to Rakitin,” he cried, suddenly trembling withanger.
“What’s the matter? I was joking,” cried Mitya. “Damn it all! They are alllike that,” he turned to Alyosha, nodding towards Rakitin’s hurriedlyretreating figure. “He was sitting here, laughing and cheerful, and all atonce he boils up like that. He didn’t even nod to you. Have you brokenwith him completely? Why are you so late? I’ve not been simply waiting,but thirsting for you the whole morning. But never mind. We’ll make up forit now.”
“Why does he come here so often? Surely you are not such great friends?”asked Alyosha. He, too, nodded at the door through which Rakitin haddisappeared.
“Great friends with Rakitin? No, not as much as that. Is it likely—a piglike that? He considers I am ... a blackguard. They can’t understand ajoke either, that’s the worst of such people. They never understand ajoke, and their souls are dry, dry and flat; they remind me of prisonwalls when I was first brought here. But he is a clever fellow, veryclever. Well, Alexey, it’s all over with me now.”
He sat down on the bench and made Alyosha sit down beside him.
“Yes, the trial’s to‐morrow. Are you so hopeless, brother?” Alyosha said,with an apprehensive feeling.
“What are you talking about?” said Mitya, looking at him ratheruncertainly. “Oh, you mean the trial! Damn it all! Till now we’ve beentalking of things that don’t matter, about this trial, but I haven’t saida word to you about the chief thing. Yes, the trial is to‐morrow; but itwasn’t the trial I meant, when I said it was all over with me. Why do youlook at me so critically?”
“What do you mean, Mitya?”
“Ideas, ideas, that’s all! Ethics! What is ethics?”
“Ethics?” asked Alyosha, wondering.
“Yes; is it a science?”
“Yes, there is such a science ... but ... I confess I can’t explain to youwhat sort of science it is.”
“Rakitin knows. Rakitin knows a lot, damn him! He’s not going to be amonk. He means to go to Petersburg. There he’ll go in for criticism of anelevating tendency. Who knows, he may be of use and make his own career,too. Ough! they are first‐rate, these people, at making a career! Damnethics, I am done for, Alexey, I am, you man of God! I love you more thanany one. It makes my heart yearn to look at you. Who was Karl Bernard?”
“Karl Bernard?” Alyosha was surprised again.
“No, not Karl. Stay, I made a mistake. Claude Bernard. What was he?Chemist or what?”
“He must be a savant,” answered Alyosha; “but I confess I can’t tell youmuch about him, either. I’ve heard of him as a savant, but what sort Idon’t know.”
“Well, damn him, then! I don’t know either,” swore Mitya. “A scoundrel ofsome sort, most likely. They are all scoundrels. And Rakitin will make hisway. Rakitin will get on anywhere; he is another Bernard. Ugh, theseBernards! They are all over the place.”
“But what is the matter?” Alyosha asked insistently.
“He wants to write an article about me, about my case, and so begin hisliterary career. That’s what he comes for; he said so himself. He wants toprove some theory. He wants to say ‘he couldn’t help murdering his father,he was corrupted by his environment,’ and so on. He explained it all tome. He is going to put in a tinge of Socialism, he says. But there, damnthe fellow, he can put in a tinge if he likes, I don’t care. He can’t bearIvan, he hates him. He’s not fond of you, either. But I don’t turn himout, for he is a clever fellow. Awfully conceited, though. I said to himjust now, ‘The Karamazovs are not blackguards, but philosophers; for alltrue Russians are philosophers, and though you’ve studied, you are not aphilosopher—you are a low fellow.’ He laughed, so maliciously. And I saidto him, ‘_De ideabus non est disputandum_.’ Isn’t that rather good? I canset up for being a classic, you see!” Mitya laughed suddenly.
“Why is it all over with you? You said so just now,” Alyosha interposed.
“Why is it all over with me? H’m!... The fact of it is ... if you take itas a whole, I am sorry to lose God—that’s why it is.”
“What do you mean by ‘sorry to lose God’?”
“Imagine: inside, in the nerves, in the head—that is, these nerves arethere in the brain ... (damn them!) there are sort of little tails, thelittle tails of those nerves, and as soon as they begin quivering ... thatis, you see, I look at something with my eyes and then they beginquivering, those little tails ... and when they quiver, then an imageappears ... it doesn’t appear at once, but an instant, a second, passes... and then something like a moment appears; that is, not a moment—deviltake the moment!—but an image; that is, an object, or an action, damn it!That’s why I see and then think, because of those tails, not at allbecause I’ve got a soul, and that I am some sort of image and likeness.All that is nonsense! Rakitin explained it all to me yesterday, brother,and it simply bowled me over. It’s magnificent, Alyosha, this science! Anew man’s arising—that I understand.... And yet I am sorry to lose God!”
“Well, that’s a good thing, anyway,” said Alyosha.
“That I am sorry to lose God? It’s chemistry, brother, chemistry! There’sno help for it, your reverence, you must make way for chemistry. AndRakitin does dislike God. Ough! doesn’t he dislike Him! That’s the sorepoint with all of them. But they conceal it. They tell lies. They pretend.‘Will you preach this in your reviews?’ I asked him. ‘Oh, well, if I didit openly, they won’t let it through,’ he said. He laughed. ‘But what willbecome of men then?’ I asked him, ‘without God and immortal life? Allthings are lawful then, they can do what they like?’ ‘Didn’t you know?’ hesaid laughing, ‘a clever man can do what he likes,’ he said. ‘A clever manknows his way about, but you’ve put your foot in it, committing a murder,and now you are rotting in prison.’ He says that to my face! A regularpig! I used to kick such people out, but now I listen to them. He talks alot of sense, too. Writes well. He began reading me an article last week.I copied out three lines of it. Wait a minute. Here it is.”
Mitya hurriedly pulled out a piece of paper from his pocket and read:
“ ‘In order to determine this question, it is above all essential to putone’s personality in contradiction to one’s reality.’ Do you understandthat?”
“No, I don’t,” said Alyosha. He looked at Mitya and listened to him withcuriosity.
“I don’t understand either. It’s dark and obscure, but intellectual.‘Every one writes like that now,’ he says, ‘it’s the effect of theirenvironment.’ They are afraid of the environment. He writes poetry, too,the rascal. He’s written in honor of Madame Hohlakov’s foot. Ha ha ha!”
“I’ve heard about it,” said Alyosha.
“Have you? And have you heard the poem?”
“No.”
“I’ve got it. Here it is. I’ll read it to you. You don’t know—I haven’ttold you—there’s quite a story about it. He’s a rascal! Three weeks ago hebegan to tease me. ‘You’ve got yourself into a mess, like a fool, for thesake of three thousand, but I’m going to collar a hundred and fiftythousand. I am going to marry a widow and buy a house in Petersburg.’ Andhe told me he was courting Madame Hohlakov. She hadn’t much brains in heryouth, and now at forty she has lost what she had. ‘But she’s awfullysentimental,’ he says; ‘that’s how I shall get hold of her. When I marryher, I shall take her to Petersburg and there I shall start a newspaper.’And his mouth was simply watering, the beast, not for the widow, but forthe hundred and fifty thousand. And he made me believe it. He came to seeme every day. ‘She is coming round,’ he declared. He was beaming withdelight. And then, all of a sudden, he was turned out of the house.Perhotin’s carrying everything before him, bravo! I could kiss the sillyold noodle for turning him out of the house. And he had written thisdoggerel. ‘It’s the first time I’ve soiled my hands with writing poetry,’he said. ‘It’s to win her heart, so it’s in a good cause. When I get holdof the silly woman’s fortune, I can be of great social utility.’ They havethis social justification for every nasty thing they do! ‘Anyway it’sbetter than your Pushkin’s poetry,’ he said, ‘for I’ve managed to advocateenlightenment even in that.’ I understand what he means about Pushkin, Iquite see that, if he really was a man of talent and only wrote aboutwomen’s feet. But wasn’t Rakitin stuck up about his doggerel! The vanityof these fellows! ‘On the convalescence of the swollen foot of the objectof my affections’—he thought of that for a title. He’s a waggish fellow.

    A captivating little foot,    Though swollen and red and tender!    The doctors come and plasters put,    But still they cannot mend her.
    Yet, ’tis not for her foot I dread—    A theme for Pushkin’s muse more fit—    It’s not her foot, it is her head:    I tremble for her loss of wit!
    For as her foot swells, strange to say,    Her intellect is on the wane—    Oh, for some remedy I pray    That may restore both foot and brain!

He is a pig, a regular pig, but he’s very arch, the rascal! And he reallyhas put in a progressive idea. And wasn’t he angry when she kicked himout! He was gnashing his teeth!”
“He’s taken his revenge already,” said Alyosha. “He’s written a paragraphabout Madame Hohlakov.”
And Alyosha told him briefly about the paragraph in _Gossip_.
“That’s his doing, that’s his doing!” Mitya assented, frowning. “That’shim! These paragraphs ... I know ... the insulting things that have beenwritten about Grushenka, for instance.... And about Katya, too.... H’m!”
He walked across the room with a harassed air.
“Brother, I cannot stay long,” Alyosha said, after a pause. “To‐morrowwill be a great and awful day for you, the judgment of God will beaccomplished ... I am amazed at you, you walk about here, talking of Idon’t know what ...”
“No, don’t be amazed at me,” Mitya broke in warmly. “Am I to talk of thatstinking dog? Of the murderer? We’ve talked enough of him. I don’t want tosay more of the stinking son of Stinking Lizaveta! God will kill him, youwill see. Hush!”
He went up to Alyosha excitedly and kissed him. His eyes glowed.
“Rakitin wouldn’t understand it,” he began in a sort of exaltation; “butyou, you’ll understand it all. That’s why I was thirsting for you. Yousee, there’s so much I’ve been wanting to tell you for ever so long, here,within these peeling walls, but I haven’t said a word about what mattersmost; the moment never seems to have come. Now I can wait no longer. Imust pour out my heart to you. Brother, these last two months I’ve foundin myself a new man. A new man has risen up in me. He was hidden in me,but would never have come to the surface, if it hadn’t been for this blowfrom heaven. I am afraid! And what do I care if I spend twenty years inthe mines, breaking ore with a hammer? I am not a bit afraid of that—it’ssomething else I am afraid of now: that that new man may leave me. Eventhere, in the mines, under‐ground, I may find a human heart in anotherconvict and murderer by my side, and I may make friends with him, for eventhere one may live and love and suffer. One may thaw and revive a frozenheart in that convict, one may wait upon him for years, and at last bringup from the dark depths a lofty soul, a feeling, suffering creature; onemay bring forth an angel, create a hero! There are so many of them,hundreds of them, and we are all to blame for them. Why was it I dreamedof that ‘babe’ at such a moment? ‘Why is the babe so poor?’ That was asign to me at that moment. It’s for the babe I’m going. Because we are allresponsible for all. For all the ‘babes,’ for there are big children aswell as little children. All are ‘babes.’ I go for all, because some onemust go for all. I didn’t kill father, but I’ve got to go. I accept it.It’s all come to me here, here, within these peeling walls. There arenumbers of them there, hundreds of them underground, with hammers in theirhands. Oh, yes, we shall be in chains and there will be no freedom, butthen, in our great sorrow, we shall rise again to joy, without which mancannot live nor God exist, for God gives joy: it’s His privilege—a grandone. Ah, man should be dissolved in prayer! What should I be undergroundthere without God? Rakitin’s laughing! If they drive God from the earth,we shall shelter Him underground. One cannot exist in prison without God;it’s even more impossible than out of prison. And then we men undergroundwill sing from the bowels of the earth a glorious hymn to God, with Whomis joy. Hail to God and His joy! I love Him!”
Mitya was almost gasping for breath as he uttered his wild speech. Heturned pale, his lips quivered, and tears rolled down his cheeks.
“Yes, life is full, there is life even underground,” he began again. “Youwouldn’t believe, Alexey, how I want to live now, what a thirst forexistence and consciousness has sprung up in me within these peelingwalls. Rakitin doesn’t understand that; all he cares about is building ahouse and letting flats. But I’ve been longing for you. And what issuffering? I am not afraid of it, even if it were beyond reckoning. I amnot afraid of it now. I was afraid of it before. Do you know, perhaps Iwon’t answer at the trial at all.... And I seem to have such strength inme now, that I think I could stand anything, any suffering, only to beable to say and to repeat to myself every moment, ‘I exist.’ In thousandsof agonies—I exist. I’m tormented on the rack—but I exist! Though I sitalone on a pillar—I exist! I see the sun, and if I don’t see the sun, Iknow it’s there. And there’s a whole life in that, in knowing that the sunis there. Alyosha, my angel, all these philosophies are the death of me.Damn them! Brother Ivan—”
“What of brother Ivan?” interrupted Alyosha, but Mitya did not hear.
“You see, I never had any of these doubts before, but it was all hiddenaway in me. It was perhaps just because ideas I did not understand weresurging up in me, that I used to drink and fight and rage. It was tostifle them in myself, to still them, to smother them. Ivan is notRakitin, there is an idea in him. Ivan is a sphinx and is silent; he isalways silent. It’s God that’s worrying me. That’s the only thing that’sworrying me. What if He doesn’t exist? What if Rakitin’s right—that it’san idea made up by men? Then if He doesn’t exist, man is the chief of theearth, of the universe. Magnificent! Only how is he going to be goodwithout God? That’s the question. I always come back to that. For whom isman going to love then? To whom will he be thankful? To whom will he singthe hymn? Rakitin laughs. Rakitin says that one can love humanity withoutGod. Well, only a sniveling idiot can maintain that. I can’t understandit. Life’s easy for Rakitin. ‘You’d better think about the extension ofcivic rights, or even of keeping down the price of meat. You will showyour love for humanity more simply and directly by that, than byphilosophy.’ I answered him, ‘Well, but you, without a God, are morelikely to raise the price of meat, if it suits you, and make a rouble onevery copeck.’ He lost his temper. But after all, what is goodness? Answerme that, Alexey. Goodness is one thing with me and another with aChinaman, so it’s a relative thing. Or isn’t it? Is it not relative? Atreacherous question! You won’t laugh if I tell you it’s kept me awake twonights. I only wonder now how people can live and think nothing about it.Vanity! Ivan has no God. He has an idea. It’s beyond me. But he is silent.I believe he is a free‐mason. I asked him, but he is silent. I wanted todrink from the springs of his soul—he was silent. But once he did drop aword.”
“What did he say?” Alyosha took it up quickly.
“I said to him, ‘Then everything is lawful, if it is so?’ He frowned.‘Fyodor Pavlovitch, our papa,’ he said, ‘was a pig, but his ideas wereright enough.’ That was what he dropped. That was all he said. That wasgoing one better than Rakitin.”
“Yes,” Alyosha assented bitterly. “When was he with you?”
“Of that later; now I must speak of something else. I have said nothingabout Ivan to you before. I put it off to the last. When my business hereis over and the verdict has been given, then I’ll tell you something. I’lltell you everything. We’ve something tremendous on hand.... And you shallbe my judge in it. But don’t begin about that now; be silent. You talk ofto‐morrow, of the trial; but, would you believe it, I know nothing aboutit.”
“Have you talked to the counsel?”
“What’s the use of the counsel? I told him all about it. He’s a soft,city‐bred rogue—a Bernard! But he doesn’t believe me—not a bit of it. Onlyimagine, he believes I did it. I see it. ‘In that case,’ I asked him, ‘whyhave you come to defend me?’ Hang them all! They’ve got a doctor down,too, want to prove I’m mad. I won’t have that! Katerina Ivanovna wants todo her ‘duty’ to the end, whatever the strain!” Mitya smiled bitterly.“The cat! Hard‐hearted creature! She knows that I said of her at Mokroethat she was a woman of ‘great wrath.’ They repeated it. Yes, the factsagainst me have grown numerous as the sands of the sea. Grigory sticks tohis point. Grigory’s honest, but a fool. Many people are honest becausethey are fools: that’s Rakitin’s idea. Grigory’s my enemy. And there aresome people who are better as foes than friends. I mean Katerina Ivanovna.I am afraid, oh, I am afraid she will tell how she bowed to the groundafter that four thousand. She’ll pay it back to the last farthing. I don’twant her sacrifice; they’ll put me to shame at the trial. I wonder how Ican stand it. Go to her, Alyosha, ask her not to speak of that in thecourt, can’t you? But damn it all, it doesn’t matter! I shall get throughsomehow. I don’t pity her. It’s her own doing. She deserves what she gets.I shall have my own story to tell, Alexey.” He smiled bitterly again.“Only ... only Grusha, Grusha! Good Lord! Why should she have suchsuffering to bear?” he exclaimed suddenly, with tears. “Grusha’s killingme; the thought of her’s killing me, killing me. She was with me justnow....”
“She told me she was very much grieved by you to‐day.”
“I know. Confound my temper! It was jealousy. I was sorry, I kissed her asshe was going. I didn’t ask her forgiveness.”
“Why didn’t you?” exclaimed Alyosha.
Suddenly Mitya laughed almost mirthfully.
“God preserve you, my dear boy, from ever asking forgiveness for a faultfrom a woman you love. From one you love especially, however greatly youmay have been in fault. For a woman—devil only knows what to make of awoman! I know something about them, anyway. But try acknowledging you arein fault to a woman. Say, ‘I am sorry, forgive me,’ and a shower ofreproaches will follow! Nothing will make her forgive you simply anddirectly, she’ll humble you to the dust, bring forward things that havenever happened, recall everything, forget nothing, add something of herown, and only then forgive you. And even the best, the best of them do it.She’ll scrape up all the scrapings and load them on your head. They areready to flay you alive, I tell you, every one of them, all these angelswithout whom we cannot live! I tell you plainly and openly, dear boy,every decent man ought to be under some woman’s thumb. That’s myconviction—not conviction, but feeling. A man ought to be magnanimous, andit’s no disgrace to a man! No disgrace to a hero, not even a Cæsar! Butdon’t ever beg her pardon all the same for anything. Remember that rulegiven you by your brother Mitya, who’s come to ruin through women. No, I’dbetter make it up to Grusha somehow, without begging pardon. I worshipher, Alexey, worship her. Only she doesn’t see it. No, she still thinks Idon’t love her enough. And she tortures me, tortures me with her love. Thepast was nothing! In the past it was only those infernal curves of hersthat tortured me, but now I’ve taken all her soul into my soul and throughher I’ve become a man myself. Will they marry us? If they don’t, I shalldie of jealousy. I imagine something every day.... What did she say to youabout me?”
Alyosha repeated all Grushenka had said to him that day. Mitya listened,made him repeat things, and seemed pleased.
“Then she is not angry at my being jealous?” he exclaimed. “She is aregular woman! ‘I’ve a fierce heart myself!’ Ah, I love such fiercehearts, though I can’t bear any one’s being jealous of me. I can’t endureit. We shall fight. But I shall love her, I shall love her infinitely.Will they marry us? Do they let convicts marry? That’s the question. Andwithout her I can’t exist....”
Mitya walked frowning across the room. It was almost dark. He suddenlyseemed terribly worried.
“So there’s a secret, she says, a secret? We have got up a plot againsther, and Katya is mixed up in it, she thinks. No, my good Grushenka,that’s not it. You are very wide of the mark, in your foolish feminineway. Alyosha, darling, well, here goes! I’ll tell you our secret!”
He looked round, went close up quickly to Alyosha, who was standing beforehim, and whispered to him with an air of mystery, though in reality no onecould hear them: the old warder was dozing in the corner, and not a wordcould reach the ears of the soldiers on guard.
“I will tell you all our secret,” Mitya whispered hurriedly. “I meant totell you later, for how could I decide on anything without you? You areeverything to me. Though I say that Ivan is superior to us, you are myangel. It’s your decision will decide it. Perhaps it’s you that issuperior and not Ivan. You see, it’s a question of conscience, question ofthe higher conscience—the secret is so important that I can’t settle itmyself, and I’ve put it off till I could speak to you. But anyway it’s tooearly to decide now, for we must wait for the verdict. As soon as theverdict is given, you shall decide my fate. Don’t decide it now. I’ll tellyou now. You listen, but don’t decide. Stand and keep quiet. I won’t tellyou everything. I’ll only tell you the idea, without details, and you keepquiet. Not a question, not a movement. You agree? But, goodness, whatshall I do with your eyes? I’m afraid your eyes will tell me yourdecision, even if you don’t speak. Oo! I’m afraid! Alyosha, listen! Ivansuggests my _escaping_. I won’t tell you the details: it’s all beenthought out: it can all be arranged. Hush, don’t decide. I should go toAmerica with Grusha. You know I can’t live without Grusha! What if theywon’t let her follow me to Siberia? Do they let convicts get married? Ivanthinks not. And without Grusha what should I do there underground with ahammer? I should only smash my skull with the hammer! But, on the otherhand, my conscience? I should have run away from suffering. A sign hascome, I reject the sign. I have a way of salvation and I turn my back onit. Ivan says that in America, ‘with the good‐will,’ I can be of more usethan underground. But what becomes of our hymn from underground? What’sAmerica? America is vanity again! And there’s a lot of swindling inAmerica, too, I expect. I should have run away from crucifixion! I tellyou, you know, Alexey, because you are the only person who can understandthis. There’s no one else. It’s folly, madness to others, all I’ve toldyou of the hymn. They’ll say I’m out of my mind or a fool. I am not out ofmy mind and I am not a fool. Ivan understands about the hymn, too. Heunderstands, only he doesn’t answer—he doesn’t speak. He doesn’t believein the hymn. Don’t speak, don’t speak. I see how you look! You havealready decided. Don’t decide, spare me! I can’t live without Grusha. Waittill after the trial!”
Mitya ended beside himself. He held Alyosha with both hands on hisshoulders, and his yearning, feverish eyes were fixed on his brother’s.
“They don’t let convicts marry, do they?” he repeated for the third timein a supplicating voice.
Alyosha listened with extreme surprise and was deeply moved.
“Tell me one thing,” he said. “Is Ivan very keen on it, and whose idea wasit?”
“His, his, and he is very keen on it. He didn’t come to see me at first,then he suddenly came a week ago and he began about it straight away. Heis awfully keen on it. He doesn’t ask me, but orders me to escape. Hedoesn’t doubt of my obeying him, though I showed him all my heart as Ihave to you, and told him about the hymn, too. He told me he’d arrange it;he’s found out about everything. But of that later. He’s simply set on it.It’s all a matter of money: he’ll pay ten thousand for escape and give metwenty thousand for America. And he says we can arrange a magnificentescape for ten thousand.”
“And he told you on no account to tell me?” Alyosha asked again.
“To tell no one, and especially not you; on no account to tell you. He isafraid, no doubt, that you’ll stand before me as my conscience. Don’t tellhim I told you. Don’t tell him, for anything.”
“You are right,” Alyosha pronounced; “it’s impossible to decide anythingbefore the trial is over. After the trial you’ll decide of yourself. Thenyou’ll find that new man in yourself and he will decide.”
“A new man, or a Bernard who’ll decide _à la_ Bernard, for I believe I’m acontemptible Bernard myself,” said Mitya, with a bitter grin.
“But, brother, have you no hope then of being acquitted?”
Mitya shrugged his shoulders nervously and shook his head. “Alyosha,darling, it’s time you were going,” he said, with a sudden haste. “There’sthe superintendent shouting in the yard. He’ll be here directly. We arelate; it’s irregular. Embrace me quickly. Kiss me! Sign me with the cross,darling, for the cross I have to bear to‐morrow.”
They embraced and kissed.
“Ivan,” said Mitya suddenly, “suggests my escaping; but, of course, hebelieves I did it.”
A mournful smile came on to his lips.
“Have you asked him whether he believes it?” asked Alyosha.
“No, I haven’t. I wanted to, but I couldn’t. I hadn’t the courage. But Isaw it from his eyes. Well, good‐by!”
Once more they kissed hurriedly, and Alyosha was just going out, whenMitya suddenly called him back.
“Stand facing me! That’s right!” And again he seized Alyosha, putting bothhands on his shoulders. His face became suddenly quite pale, so that itwas dreadfully apparent, even through the gathering darkness. His lipstwitched, his eyes fastened upon Alyosha.
“Alyosha, tell me the whole truth, as you would before God. Do you believeI did it? Do you, do you in yourself, believe it? The whole truth, don’tlie!” he cried desperately.
Everything seemed heaving before Alyosha, and he felt something like astab at his heart.
“Hush! What do you mean?” he faltered helplessly.
“The whole truth, the whole, don’t lie!” repeated Mitya.
“I’ve never for one instant believed that you were the murderer!” broke ina shaking voice from Alyosha’s breast, and he raised his right hand in theair, as though calling God to witness his words.
Mitya’s whole face was lighted up with bliss.
“Thank you!” he articulated slowly, as though letting a sigh escape himafter fainting. “Now you have given me new life. Would you believe it,till this moment I’ve been afraid to ask you, you, even you. Well, go!You’ve given me strength for to‐morrow. God bless you! Come, go along!Love Ivan!” was Mitya’s last word.
Alyosha went out in tears. Such distrustfulness in Mitya, such lack ofconfidence even to him, to Alyosha—all this suddenly opened before Alyoshaan unsuspected depth of hopeless grief and despair in the soul of hisunhappy brother. Intense, infinite compassion overwhelmed him instantly.There was a poignant ache in his torn heart. “Love Ivan!”—he suddenlyrecalled Mitya’s words. And he was going to Ivan. He badly wanted to seeIvan all day. He was as much worried about Ivan as about Mitya, and morethan ever now.


Chapter V. Not You, Not You!

On the way to Ivan he had to pass the house where Katerina Ivanovna wasliving. There was light in the windows. He suddenly stopped and resolvedto go in. He had not seen Katerina Ivanovna for more than a week. But nowit struck him that Ivan might be with her, especially on the eve of theterrible day. Ringing, and mounting the staircase, which was dimly lightedby a Chinese lantern, he saw a man coming down, and as they met, herecognized him as his brother. So he was just coming from KaterinaIvanovna.
“Ah, it’s only you,” said Ivan dryly. “Well, good‐by! You are going toher?”
“Yes.”
“I don’t advise you to; she’s upset and you’ll upset her more.”
A door was instantly flung open above, and a voice cried suddenly:
“No, no! Alexey Fyodorovitch, have you come from him?”
“Yes, I have been with him.”
“Has he sent me any message? Come up, Alyosha, and you, Ivan Fyodorovitch,you must come back, you must. Do you hear?”
There was such a peremptory note in Katya’s voice that Ivan, after amoment’s hesitation, made up his mind to go back with Alyosha.
“She was listening,” he murmured angrily to himself, but Alyosha heard it.
“Excuse my keeping my greatcoat on,” said Ivan, going into the drawing‐room. “I won’t sit down. I won’t stay more than a minute.”
“Sit down, Alexey Fyodorovitch,” said Katerina Ivanovna, though sheremained standing. She had changed very little during this time, but therewas an ominous gleam in her dark eyes. Alyosha remembered afterwards thatshe had struck him as particularly handsome at that moment.
“What did he ask you to tell me?”
“Only one thing,” said Alyosha, looking her straight in the face, “thatyou would spare yourself and say nothing at the trial of what” (he was alittle confused) “... passed between you ... at the time of your firstacquaintance ... in that town.”
“Ah! that I bowed down to the ground for that money!” She broke into abitter laugh. “Why, is he afraid for me or for himself? He asks me tospare—whom? Him or myself? Tell me, Alexey Fyodorovitch!”
Alyosha watched her intently, trying to understand her.
“Both yourself and him,” he answered softly.
“I am glad to hear it,” she snapped out maliciously, and she suddenlyblushed.
“You don’t know me yet, Alexey Fyodorovitch,” she said menacingly. “And Idon’t know myself yet. Perhaps you’ll want to trample me under foot aftermy examination to‐morrow.”
“You will give your evidence honorably,” said Alyosha; “that’s all that’swanted.”
“Women are often dishonorable,” she snarled. “Only an hour ago I wasthinking I felt afraid to touch that monster ... as though he were areptile ... but no, he is still a human being to me! But did he do it? Ishe the murderer?” she cried, all of a sudden, hysterically, turningquickly to Ivan. Alyosha saw at once that she had asked Ivan that questionbefore, perhaps only a moment before he came in, and not for the firsttime, but for the hundredth, and that they had ended by quarreling.
“I’ve been to see Smerdyakov.... It was you, you who persuaded me that hemurdered his father. It’s only you I believed!” she continued, stilladdressing Ivan. He gave her a sort of strained smile. Alyosha started ather tone. He had not suspected such familiar intimacy between them.
“Well, that’s enough, anyway,” Ivan cut short the conversation. “I amgoing. I’ll come to‐morrow.” And turning at once, he walked out of theroom and went straight downstairs.
With an imperious gesture, Katerina Ivanovna seized Alyosha by both hands.
“Follow him! Overtake him! Don’t leave him alone for a minute!” she said,in a hurried whisper. “He’s mad! Don’t you know that he’s mad? He is in afever, nervous fever. The doctor told me so. Go, run after him....”
Alyosha jumped up and ran after Ivan, who was not fifty paces ahead ofhim.
“What do you want?” He turned quickly on Alyosha, seeing that he wasrunning after him. “She told you to catch me up, because I’m mad. I knowit all by heart,” he added irritably.
“She is mistaken, of course; but she is right that you are ill,” saidAlyosha. “I was looking at your face just now. You look very ill, Ivan.”
Ivan walked on without stopping. Alyosha followed him.
“And do you know, Alexey Fyodorovitch, how people do go out of theirmind?” Ivan asked in a voice suddenly quiet, without a trace ofirritation, with a note of the simplest curiosity.
“No, I don’t. I suppose there are all kinds of insanity.”
“And can one observe that one’s going mad oneself?”
“I imagine one can’t see oneself clearly in such circumstances,” Alyoshaanswered with surprise.
Ivan paused for half a minute.
“If you want to talk to me, please change the subject,” he said suddenly.
“Oh, while I think of it, I have a letter for you,” said Alyosha timidly,and he took Lise’s note from his pocket and held it out to Ivan. They werejust under a lamp‐post. Ivan recognized the handwriting at once.
“Ah, from that little demon!” he laughed maliciously, and, without openingthe envelope, he tore it into bits and threw it in the air. The bits werescattered by the wind.
“She’s not sixteen yet, I believe, and already offering herself,” he saidcontemptuously, striding along the street again.
“How do you mean, offering herself?” exclaimed Alyosha.
“As wanton women offer themselves, to be sure.”
“How can you, Ivan, how can you?” Alyosha cried warmly, in a grievedvoice. “She is a child; you are insulting a child! She is ill; she is veryill, too. She is on the verge of insanity, too, perhaps.... I had hoped tohear something from you ... that would save her.”
“You’ll hear nothing from me. If she is a child I am not her nurse. Bequiet, Alexey. Don’t go on about her. I am not even thinking about it.”
They were silent again for a moment.
“She will be praying all night now to the Mother of God to show her how toact to‐morrow at the trial,” he said sharply and angrily again.
“You ... you mean Katerina Ivanovna?”
“Yes. Whether she’s to save Mitya or ruin him. She’ll pray for light fromabove. She can’t make up her mind for herself, you see. She has not hadtime to decide yet. She takes me for her nurse, too. She wants me to singlullabies to her.”
“Katerina Ivanovna loves you, brother,” said Alyosha sadly.
“Perhaps; but I am not very keen on her.”
“She is suffering. Why do you ... sometimes say things to her that giveher hope?” Alyosha went on, with timid reproach. “I know that you’ve givenher hope. Forgive me for speaking to you like this,” he added.
“I can’t behave to her as I ought—break off altogether and tell her sostraight out,” said Ivan, irritably. “I must wait till sentence is passedon the murderer. If I break off with her now, she will avenge herself onme by ruining that scoundrel to‐morrow at the trial, for she hates him andknows she hates him. It’s all a lie—lie upon lie! As long as I don’t breakoff with her, she goes on hoping, and she won’t ruin that monster, knowinghow I want to get him out of trouble. If only that damned verdict wouldcome!”
The words “murderer” and “monster” echoed painfully in Alyosha’s heart.
“But how can she ruin Mitya?” he asked, pondering on Ivan’s words. “Whatevidence can she give that would ruin Mitya?”
“You don’t know that yet. She’s got a document in her hands, in Mitya’sown writing, that proves conclusively that he did murder FyodorPavlovitch.”
“That’s impossible!” cried Alyosha.
“Why is it impossible? I’ve read it myself.”
“There can’t be such a document!” Alyosha repeated warmly. “There can’tbe, because he’s not the murderer. It’s not he murdered father, not he!”
Ivan suddenly stopped.
“Who is the murderer then, according to you?” he asked, with apparentcoldness. There was even a supercilious note in his voice.
“You know who,” Alyosha pronounced in a low, penetrating voice.
“Who? You mean the myth about that crazy idiot, the epileptic,Smerdyakov?”
Alyosha suddenly felt himself trembling all over.
“You know who,” broke helplessly from him. He could scarcely breathe.
“Who? Who?” Ivan cried almost fiercely. All his restraint suddenlyvanished.
“I only know one thing,” Alyosha went on, still almost in a whisper, “_itwasn’t you_ killed father.”
“ ‘Not you’! What do you mean by ‘not you’?” Ivan was thunderstruck.
“It was not you killed father, not you!” Alyosha repeated firmly.
The silence lasted for half a minute.
“I know I didn’t. Are you raving?” said Ivan, with a pale, distortedsmile. His eyes were riveted on Alyosha. They were standing again under alamp‐post.
“No, Ivan. You’ve told yourself several times that you are the murderer.”
“When did I say so? I was in Moscow.... When have I said so?” Ivanfaltered helplessly.
“You’ve said so to yourself many times, when you’ve been alone duringthese two dreadful months,” Alyosha went on softly and distinctly asbefore. Yet he was speaking now, as it were, not of himself, not of hisown will, but obeying some irresistible command. “You have accusedyourself and have confessed to yourself that you are the murderer and noone else. But you didn’t do it: you are mistaken: you are not themurderer. Do you hear? It was not you! God has sent me to tell you so.”
They were both silent. The silence lasted a whole long minute. They wereboth standing still, gazing into each other’s eyes. They were both pale.Suddenly Ivan began trembling all over, and clutched Alyosha’s shoulder.
“You’ve been in my room!” he whispered hoarsely. “You’ve been there atnight, when he came.... Confess ... have you seen him, have you seen him?”
“Whom do you mean—Mitya?” Alyosha asked, bewildered.
“Not him, damn the monster!” Ivan shouted, in a frenzy. “Do you know thathe visits me? How did you find out? Speak!”
“Who is _he_! I don’t know whom you are talking about,” Alyosha faltered,beginning to be alarmed.
“Yes, you do know ... or how could you—? It’s impossible that you don’tknow.”
Suddenly he seemed to check himself. He stood still and seemed to reflect.A strange grin contorted his lips.
“Brother,” Alyosha began again, in a shaking voice, “I have said this toyou, because you’ll believe my word, I know that. I tell you once and forall, it’s not you. You hear, once for all! God has put it into my heart tosay this to you, even though it may make you hate me from this hour.”
But by now Ivan had apparently regained his self‐control.
“Alexey Fyodorovitch,” he said, with a cold smile, “I can’t endureprophets and epileptics—messengers from God especially—and you know thatonly too well. I break off all relations with you from this moment andprobably for ever. I beg you to leave me at this turning. It’s the way toyour lodgings, too. You’d better be particularly careful not to come to meto‐day! Do you hear?”
He turned and walked on with a firm step, not looking back.
“Brother,” Alyosha called after him, “if anything happens to you to‐day,turn to me before any one!”
But Ivan made no reply. Alyosha stood under the lamp‐post at the crossroads, till Ivan had vanished into the darkness. Then he turned and walkedslowly homewards. Both Alyosha and Ivan were living in lodgings; neitherof them was willing to live in Fyodor Pavlovitch’s empty house. Alyoshahad a furnished room in the house of some working people. Ivan lived somedistance from him. He had taken a roomy and fairly comfortable lodgeattached to a fine house that belonged to a well‐to‐do lady, the widow ofan official. But his only attendant was a deaf and rheumatic old crone whowent to bed at six o’clock every evening and got up at six in the morning.Ivan had become remarkably indifferent to his comforts of late, and veryfond of being alone. He did everything for himself in the one room helived in, and rarely entered any of the other rooms in his abode.
He reached the gate of the house and had his hand on the bell, when hesuddenly stopped. He felt that he was trembling all over with anger.Suddenly he let go of the bell, turned back with a curse, and walked withrapid steps in the opposite direction. He walked a mile and a half to atiny, slanting, wooden house, almost a hut, where Marya Kondratyevna, theneighbor who used to come to Fyodor Pavlovitch’s kitchen for soup and towhom Smerdyakov had once sung his songs and played on the guitar, was nowlodging. She had sold their little house, and was now living here with hermother. Smerdyakov, who was ill—almost dying—had been with them ever sinceFyodor Pavlovitch’s death. It was to him Ivan was going now, drawn by asudden and irresistible prompting.


Chapter VI. The First Interview With Smerdyakov

This was the third time that Ivan had been to see Smerdyakov since hisreturn from Moscow. The first time he had seen him and talked to him wason the first day of his arrival, then he had visited him once more, afortnight later. But his visits had ended with that second one, so that itwas now over a month since he had seen him. And he had scarcely heardanything of him.
Ivan had only returned five days after his father’s death, so that he wasnot present at the funeral, which took place the day before he came back.The cause of his delay was that Alyosha, not knowing his Moscow address,had to apply to Katerina Ivanovna to telegraph to him, and she, notknowing his address either, telegraphed to her sister and aunt, reckoningon Ivan’s going to see them as soon as he arrived in Moscow. But he didnot go to them till four days after his arrival. When he got the telegram,he had, of course, set off post‐haste to our town. The first to meet himwas Alyosha, and Ivan was greatly surprised to find that, in opposition tothe general opinion of the town, he refused to entertain a suspicionagainst Mitya, and spoke openly of Smerdyakov as the murderer. Later on,after seeing the police captain and the prosecutor, and hearing thedetails of the charge and the arrest, he was still more surprised atAlyosha, and ascribed his opinion only to his exaggerated brotherlyfeeling and sympathy with Mitya, of whom Alyosha, as Ivan knew, was veryfond.
By the way, let us say a word or two of Ivan’s feeling to his brotherDmitri. He positively disliked him; at most, felt sometimes a compassionfor him, and even that was mixed with great contempt, almost repugnance.Mitya’s whole personality, even his appearance, was extremely unattractiveto him. Ivan looked with indignation on Katerina Ivanovna’s love for hisbrother. Yet he went to see Mitya on the first day of his arrival, andthat interview, far from shaking Ivan’s belief in his guilt, positivelystrengthened it. He found his brother agitated, nervously excited. Mityahad been talkative, but very absent‐minded and incoherent. He used violentlanguage, accused Smerdyakov, and was fearfully muddled. He talkedprincipally about the three thousand roubles, which he said had been“stolen” from him by his father.
“The money was mine, it was my money,” Mitya kept repeating. “Even if Ihad stolen it, I should have had the right.”
He hardly contested the evidence against him, and if he tried to turn afact to his advantage, it was in an absurd and incoherent way. He hardlyseemed to wish to defend himself to Ivan or any one else. Quite thecontrary, he was angry and proudly scornful of the charges against him; hewas continually firing up and abusing every one. He only laughedcontemptuously at Grigory’s evidence about the open door, and declaredthat it was “the devil that opened it.” But he could not bring forward anycoherent explanation of the fact. He even succeeded in insulting Ivanduring their first interview, telling him sharply that it was not forpeople who declared that “everything was lawful,” to suspect and questionhim. Altogether he was anything but friendly with Ivan on that occasion.Immediately after that interview with Mitya, Ivan went for the first timeto see Smerdyakov.
In the railway train on his way from Moscow, he kept thinking ofSmerdyakov and of his last conversation with him on the evening before hewent away. Many things seemed to him puzzling and suspicious. But when hegave his evidence to the investigating lawyer Ivan said nothing, for thetime, of that conversation. He put that off till he had seen Smerdyakov,who was at that time in the hospital.
Doctor Herzenstube and Varvinsky, the doctor he met in the hospital,confidently asserted in reply to Ivan’s persistent questions, thatSmerdyakov’s epileptic attack was unmistakably genuine, and were surprisedindeed at Ivan asking whether he might not have been shamming on the dayof the catastrophe. They gave him to understand that the attack was anexceptional one, the fits persisting and recurring several times, so thatthe patient’s life was positively in danger, and it was only now, afterthey had applied remedies, that they could assert with confidence that thepatient would survive. “Though it might well be,” added DoctorHerzenstube, “that his reason would be impaired for a considerable period,if not permanently.” On Ivan’s asking impatiently whether that meant thathe was now mad, they told him that this was not yet the case, in the fullsense of the word, but that certain abnormalities were perceptible. Ivandecided to find out for himself what those abnormalities were.
At the hospital he was at once allowed to see the patient. Smerdyakov waslying on a truckle‐bed in a separate ward. There was only one other bed inthe room, and in it lay a tradesman of the town, swollen with dropsy, whowas obviously almost dying; he could be no hindrance to theirconversation. Smerdyakov grinned uncertainly on seeing Ivan, and for thefirst instant seemed nervous. So at least Ivan fancied. But that was onlymomentary. For the rest of the time he was struck, on the contrary, bySmerdyakov’s composure. From the first glance Ivan had no doubt that hewas very ill. He was very weak; he spoke slowly, seeming to move histongue with difficulty; he was much thinner and sallower. Throughout theinterview, which lasted twenty minutes, he kept complaining of headacheand of pain in all his limbs. His thin emasculate face seemed to havebecome so tiny; his hair was ruffled, and his crest of curls in frontstood up in a thin tuft. But in the left eye, which was screwed up andseemed to be insinuating something, Smerdyakov showed himself unchanged.“It’s always worth while speaking to a clever man.” Ivan was reminded ofthat at once. He sat down on the stool at his feet. Smerdyakov, withpainful effort, shifted his position in bed, but he was not the first tospeak. He remained dumb, and did not even look much interested.
“Can you talk to me?” asked Ivan. “I won’t tire you much.”
“Certainly I can,” mumbled Smerdyakov, in a faint voice. “Has your honorbeen back long?” he added patronizingly, as though encouraging a nervousvisitor.
“I only arrived to‐day.... To see the mess you are in here.” Smerdyakovsighed.
“Why do you sigh? You knew of it all along,” Ivan blurted out.
Smerdyakov was stolidly silent for a while.
“How could I help knowing? It was clear beforehand. But how could I tellit would turn out like that?”
“What would turn out? Don’t prevaricate! You’ve foretold you’d have a fit;on the way down to the cellar, you know. You mentioned the very spot.”
“Have you said so at the examination yet?” Smerdyakov queried withcomposure.
Ivan felt suddenly angry.
“No, I haven’t yet, but I certainly shall. You must explain a great dealto me, my man; and let me tell you, I am not going to let you play withme!”
“Why should I play with you, when I put my whole trust in you, as in GodAlmighty?” said Smerdyakov, with the same composure, only for a momentclosing his eyes.
“In the first place,” began Ivan, “I know that epileptic fits can’t betold beforehand. I’ve inquired; don’t try and take me in. You can’tforetell the day and the hour. How was it you told me the day and the hourbeforehand, and about the cellar, too? How could you tell that you wouldfall down the cellar stairs in a fit, if you didn’t sham a fit onpurpose?”
“I had to go to the cellar anyway, several times a day, indeed,”Smerdyakov drawled deliberately. “I fell from the garret just in the sameway a year ago. It’s quite true you can’t tell the day and hour of a fitbeforehand, but you can always have a presentiment of it.”
“But you did foretell the day and the hour!”
“In regard to my epilepsy, sir, you had much better inquire of the doctorshere. You can ask them whether it was a real fit or a sham; it’s no use mysaying any more about it.”
“And the cellar? How could you know beforehand of the cellar?”
“You don’t seem able to get over that cellar! As I was going down to thecellar, I was in terrible dread and doubt. What frightened me most waslosing you and being left without defense in all the world. So I went downinto the cellar thinking, ‘Here, it’ll come on directly, it’ll strike medown directly, shall I fall?’ And it was through this fear that I suddenlyfelt the spasm that always comes ... and so I went flying. All that andall my previous conversation with you at the gate the evening before, whenI told you how frightened I was and spoke of the cellar, I told all thatto Doctor Herzenstube and Nikolay Parfenovitch, the investigating lawyer,and it’s all been written down in the protocol. And the doctor here, Mr.Varvinsky, maintained to all of them that it was just the thought of itbrought it on, the apprehension that I might fall. It was just then thatthe fit seized me. And so they’ve written it down, that it’s just how itmust have happened, simply from my fear.”
As he finished, Smerdyakov drew a deep breath, as though exhausted.
“Then you have said all that in your evidence?” said Ivan, somewhat takenaback. He had meant to frighten him with the threat of repeating theirconversation, and it appeared that Smerdyakov had already reported it allhimself.
“What have I to be afraid of? Let them write down the whole truth,”Smerdyakov pronounced firmly.
“And have you told them every word of our conversation at the gate?”
“No, not to say every word.”
“And did you tell them that you can sham fits, as you boasted then?”
“No, I didn’t tell them that either.”
“Tell me now, why did you send me then to Tchermashnya?”
“I was afraid you’d go away to Moscow; Tchermashnya is nearer, anyway.”
“You are lying; you suggested my going away yourself; you told me to getout of the way of trouble.”
“That was simply out of affection and my sincere devotion to you,foreseeing trouble in the house, to spare you. Only I wanted to sparemyself even more. That’s why I told you to get out of harm’s way, that youmight understand that there would be trouble in the house, and wouldremain at home to protect your father.”
“You might have said it more directly, you blockhead!” Ivan suddenly firedup.
“How could I have said it more directly then? It was simply my fear thatmade me speak, and you might have been angry, too. I might well have beenapprehensive that Dmitri Fyodorovitch would make a scene and carry awaythat money, for he considered it as good as his own; but who could tellthat it would end in a murder like this? I thought that he would onlycarry off the three thousand that lay under the master’s mattress in theenvelope, and you see, he’s murdered him. How could you guess it either,sir?”
“But if you say yourself that it couldn’t be guessed, how could I haveguessed and stayed at home? You contradict yourself!” said Ivan,pondering.
“You might have guessed from my sending you to Tchermashnya and not toMoscow.”
“How could I guess it from that?”
Smerdyakov seemed much exhausted, and again he was silent for a minute.
“You might have guessed from the fact of my asking you not to go toMoscow, but to Tchermashnya, that I wanted to have you nearer, forMoscow’s a long way off, and Dmitri Fyodorovitch, knowing you are not faroff, would not be so bold. And if anything had happened, you might havecome to protect me, too, for I warned you of Grigory Vassilyevitch’sillness, and that I was afraid of having a fit. And when I explained thoseknocks to you, by means of which one could go in to the deceased, and thatDmitri Fyodorovitch knew them all through me, I thought that you wouldguess yourself that he would be sure to do something, and so wouldn’t goto Tchermashnya even, but would stay.”
“He talks very coherently,” thought Ivan, “though he does mumble; what’sthe derangement of his faculties that Herzenstube talked of?”
“You are cunning with me, damn you!” he exclaimed, getting angry.
“But I thought at the time that you quite guessed,” Smerdyakov parriedwith the simplest air.
“If I’d guessed, I should have stayed,” cried Ivan.
“Why, I thought that it was because you guessed, that you went away insuch a hurry, only to get out of trouble, only to run away and saveyourself in your fright.”
“You think that every one is as great a coward as yourself?”
“Forgive me, I thought you were like me.”
“Of course, I ought to have guessed,” Ivan said in agitation; “and I didguess there was some mischief brewing on your part ... only you are lying,you are lying again,” he cried, suddenly recollecting. “Do you rememberhow you went up to the carriage and said to me, ‘It’s always worth whilespeaking to a clever man’? So you were glad I went away, since you praisedme?”
Smerdyakov sighed again and again. A trace of color came into his face.
“If I was pleased,” he articulated rather breathlessly, “it was simplybecause you agreed not to go to Moscow, but to Tchermashnya. For it wasnearer, anyway. Only when I said these words to you, it was not by way ofpraise, but of reproach. You didn’t understand it.”
“What reproach?”
“Why, that foreseeing such a calamity you deserted your own father, andwould not protect us, for I might have been taken up any time for stealingthat three thousand.”
“Damn you!” Ivan swore again. “Stay, did you tell the prosecutor and theinvestigating lawyer about those knocks?”
“I told them everything just as it was.”
Ivan wondered inwardly again.
“If I thought of anything then,” he began again, “it was solely of somewickedness on your part. Dmitri might kill him, but that he would steal—Idid not believe that then.... But I was prepared for any wickedness fromyou. You told me yourself you could sham a fit. What did you say thatfor?”
“It was just through my simplicity, and I never have shammed a fit onpurpose in my life. And I only said so then to boast to you. It was justfoolishness. I liked you so much then, and was open‐hearted with you.”
“My brother directly accuses you of the murder and theft.”
“What else is left for him to do?” said Smerdyakov, with a bitter grin.“And who will believe him with all the proofs against him? GrigoryVassilyevitch saw the door open. What can he say after that? But nevermind him! He is trembling to save himself.”
He slowly ceased speaking; then suddenly, as though on reflection, added:
“And look here again. He wants to throw it on me and make out that it isthe work of my hands—I’ve heard that already. But as to my being clever atshamming a fit: should I have told you beforehand that I could sham one,if I really had had such a design against your father? If I had beenplanning such a murder could I have been such a fool as to give suchevidence against myself beforehand? And to his son, too! Upon my word! Isthat likely? As if that could be, such a thing has never happened. No onehears this talk of ours now, except Providence itself, and if you were totell of it to the prosecutor and Nikolay Parfenovitch you might defend mecompletely by doing so, for who would be likely to be such a criminal, ifhe is so open‐hearted beforehand? Any one can see that.”
“Well,” and Ivan got up to cut short the conversation, struck bySmerdyakov’s last argument. “I don’t suspect you at all, and I think it’sabsurd, indeed, to suspect you. On the contrary, I am grateful to you forsetting my mind at rest. Now I am going, but I’ll come again. Meanwhile,good‐by. Get well. Is there anything you want?”
“I am very thankful for everything. Marfa Ignatyevna does not forget me,and provides me anything I want, according to her kindness. Good peoplevisit me every day.”
“Good‐by. But I shan’t say anything of your being able to sham a fit, andI don’t advise you to, either,” something made Ivan say suddenly.
“I quite understand. And if you don’t speak of that, I shall say nothingof that conversation of ours at the gate.”
Then it happened that Ivan went out, and only when he had gone a dozensteps along the corridor, he suddenly felt that there was an insultingsignificance in Smerdyakov’s last words. He was almost on the point ofturning back, but it was only a passing impulse, and muttering,“Nonsense!” he went out of the hospital.
His chief feeling was one of relief at the fact that it was notSmerdyakov, but Mitya, who had committed the murder, though he might havebeen expected to feel the opposite. He did not want to analyze the reasonfor this feeling, and even felt a positive repugnance at prying into hissensations. He felt as though he wanted to make haste to forget something.In the following days he became convinced of Mitya’s guilt, as he got toknow all the weight of evidence against him. There was evidence of peopleof no importance, Fenya and her mother, for instance, but the effect of itwas almost overpowering. As to Perhotin, the people at the tavern, and atPlotnikov’s shop, as well as the witnesses at Mokroe, their evidenceseemed conclusive. It was the details that were so damning. The secret ofthe knocks impressed the lawyers almost as much as Grigory’s evidence asto the open door. Grigory’s wife, Marfa, in answer to Ivan’s questions,declared that Smerdyakov had been lying all night the other side of thepartition wall. “He was not three paces from our bed,” and that althoughshe was a sound sleeper she waked several times and heard him moaning, “Hewas moaning the whole time, moaning continually.”
Talking to Herzenstube, and giving it as his opinion that Smerdyakov wasnot mad, but only rather weak, Ivan only evoked from the old man a subtlesmile.
“Do you know how he spends his time now?” he asked; “learning lists ofFrench words by heart. He has an exercise‐book under his pillow with theFrench words written out in Russian letters for him by some one, he hehe!”
Ivan ended by dismissing all doubts. He could not think of Dmitri withoutrepulsion. Only one thing was strange, however. Alyosha persisted thatDmitri was not the murderer, and that “in all probability” Smerdyakov was.Ivan always felt that Alyosha’s opinion meant a great deal to him, and sohe was astonished at it now. Another thing that was strange was thatAlyosha did not make any attempt to talk about Mitya with Ivan, that henever began on the subject and only answered his questions. This, too,struck Ivan particularly.
But he was very much preoccupied at that time with something quite apartfrom that. On his return from Moscow, he abandoned himself hopelessly tohis mad and consuming passion for Katerina Ivanovna. This is not the timeto begin to speak of this new passion of Ivan’s, which left its mark onall the rest of his life: this would furnish the subject for anothernovel, which I may perhaps never write. But I cannot omit to mention herethat when Ivan, on leaving Katerina Ivanovna with Alyosha, as I’ve relatedalready, told him, “I am not keen on her,” it was an absolute lie: heloved her madly, though at times he hated her so that he might havemurdered her. Many causes helped to bring about this feeling. Shattered bywhat had happened with Mitya, she rushed on Ivan’s return to meet him asher one salvation. She was hurt, insulted and humiliated in her feelings.And here the man had come back to her, who had loved her so ardentlybefore (oh! she knew that very well), and whose heart and intellect sheconsidered so superior to her own. But the sternly virtuous girl did notabandon herself altogether to the man she loved, in spite of the Karamazovviolence of his passions and the great fascination he had for her. She wascontinually tormented at the same time by remorse for having desertedMitya, and in moments of discord and violent anger (and they werenumerous) she told Ivan so plainly. This was what he had called to Alyosha“lies upon lies.” There was, of course, much that was false in it, andthat angered Ivan more than anything.... But of all this later.
He did, in fact, for a time almost forget Smerdyakov’s existence, and yet,a fortnight after his first visit to him, he began to be haunted by thesame strange thoughts as before. It’s enough to say that he wascontinually asking himself, why was it that on that last night in FyodorPavlovitch’s house he had crept out on to the stairs like a thief andlistened to hear what his father was doing below? Why had he recalled thatafterwards with repulsion? Why next morning, had he been suddenly sodepressed on the journey? Why, as he reached Moscow, had he said tohimself, “I am a scoundrel”? And now he almost fancied that thesetormenting thoughts would make him even forget Katerina Ivanovna, socompletely did they take possession of him again. It was just afterfancying this, that he met Alyosha in the street. He stopped him at once,and put a question to him:
“Do you remember when Dmitri burst in after dinner and beat father, andafterwards I told you in the yard that I reserved ‘the right todesire’?... Tell me, did you think then that I desired father’s death ornot?”
“I did think so,” answered Alyosha, softly.
“It was so, too; it was not a matter of guessing. But didn’t you fancythen that what I wished was just that ‘one reptile should devour another’;that is, just that Dmitri should kill father, and as soon as possible ...and that I myself was even prepared to help to bring that about?”
Alyosha turned rather pale, and looked silently into his brother’s face.
“Speak!” cried Ivan, “I want above everything to know what you thoughtthen. I want the truth, the truth!”
He drew a deep breath, looking angrily at Alyosha before his answer came.
“Forgive me, I did think that, too, at the time,” whispered Alyosha, andhe did not add one softening phrase.
“Thanks,” snapped Ivan, and, leaving Alyosha, he went quickly on his way.From that time Alyosha noticed that Ivan began obviously to avoid him andseemed even to have taken a dislike to him, so much so that Alyosha gaveup going to see him. Immediately after that meeting with him, Ivan had notgone home, but went straight to Smerdyakov again.


Chapter VII. The Second Visit To Smerdyakov

By that time Smerdyakov had been discharged from the hospital. Ivan knewhis new lodging, the dilapidated little wooden house, divided in two by apassage on one side of which lived Marya Kondratyevna and her mother, andon the other, Smerdyakov. No one knew on what terms he lived with them,whether as a friend or as a lodger. It was supposed afterwards that he hadcome to stay with them as Marya Kondratyevna’s betrothed, and was livingthere for a time without paying for board or lodging. Both mother anddaughter had the greatest respect for him and looked upon him as greatlysuperior to themselves.
Ivan knocked, and, on the door being opened, went straight into thepassage. By Marya Kondratyevna’s directions he went straight to the betterroom on the left, occupied by Smerdyakov. There was a tiled stove in theroom and it was extremely hot. The walls were gay with blue paper, whichwas a good deal used however, and in the cracks under it cockroachesswarmed in amazing numbers, so that there was a continual rustling fromthem. The furniture was very scanty: two benches against each wall and twochairs by the table. The table of plain wood was covered with a cloth withpink patterns on it. There was a pot of geranium on each of the two littlewindows. In the corner there was a case of ikons. On the table stood alittle copper samovar with many dents in it, and a tray with two cups. ButSmerdyakov had finished tea and the samovar was out. He was sitting at thetable on a bench. He was looking at an exercise‐book and slowly writingwith a pen. There was a bottle of ink by him and a flat iron candlestick,but with a composite candle. Ivan saw at once from Smerdyakov’s face thathe had completely recovered from his illness. His face was fresher,fuller, his hair stood up jauntily in front, and was plastered down at thesides. He was sitting in a parti‐colored, wadded dressing‐gown, ratherdirty and frayed, however. He had spectacles on his nose, which Ivan hadnever seen him wearing before. This trifling circumstance suddenlyredoubled Ivan’s anger: “A creature like that and wearing spectacles!”
Smerdyakov slowly raised his head and looked intently at his visitorthrough his spectacles; then he slowly took them off and rose from thebench, but by no means respectfully, almost lazily, doing the leastpossible required by common civility. All this struck Ivan instantly; hetook it all in and noted it at once—most of all the look in Smerdyakov’seyes, positively malicious, churlish and haughty. “What do you want tointrude for?” it seemed to say; “we settled everything then; why have youcome again?” Ivan could scarcely control himself.
“It’s hot here,” he said, still standing, and unbuttoned his overcoat.
“Take off your coat,” Smerdyakov conceded.
Ivan took off his coat and threw it on a bench with trembling hands. Hetook a chair, moved it quickly to the table and sat down. Smerdyakovmanaged to sit down on his bench before him.
“To begin with, are we alone?” Ivan asked sternly and impulsively. “Canthey overhear us in there?”
“No one can hear anything. You’ve seen for yourself: there’s a passage.”
“Listen, my good fellow; what was that you babbled, as I was leaving thehospital, that if I said nothing about your faculty of shamming fits, youwouldn’t tell the investigating lawyer all our conversation at the gate?What do you mean by _all_? What could you mean by it? Were you threateningme? Have I entered into some sort of compact with you? Do you suppose I amafraid of you?”
Ivan said this in a perfect fury, giving him to understand with obviousintention that he scorned any subterfuge or indirectness and meant to showhis cards. Smerdyakov’s eyes gleamed resentfully, his left eye winked, andhe at once gave his answer, with his habitual composure and deliberation.“You want to have everything above‐board; very well, you shall have it,”he seemed to say.
“This is what I meant then, and this is why I said that, that you, knowingbeforehand of this murder of your own parent, left him to his fate, andthat people mightn’t after that conclude any evil about your feelings andperhaps of something else, too—that’s what I promised not to tell theauthorities.”
Though Smerdyakov spoke without haste and obviously controlling himself,yet there was something in his voice, determined and emphatic, resentfuland insolently defiant. He stared impudently at Ivan. A mist passed beforeIvan’s eyes for the first moment.
“How? What? Are you out of your mind?”
“I’m perfectly in possession of all my faculties.”
“Do you suppose I _knew_ of the murder?” Ivan cried at last, and hebrought his fist violently on the table. “What do you mean by ‘somethingelse, too’? Speak, scoundrel!”
Smerdyakov was silent and still scanned Ivan with the same insolent stare.
“Speak, you stinking rogue, what is that ‘something else, too’?”
“The ‘something else’ I meant was that you probably, too, were verydesirous of your parent’s death.”
Ivan jumped up and struck him with all his might on the shoulder, so thathe fell back against the wall. In an instant his face was bathed in tears.Saying, “It’s a shame, sir, to strike a sick man,” he dried his eyes witha very dirty blue check handkerchief and sank into quiet weeping. A minutepassed.
“That’s enough! Leave off,” Ivan said peremptorily, sitting down again.“Don’t put me out of all patience.”
Smerdyakov took the rag from his eyes. Every line of his puckered facereflected the insult he had just received.
“So you thought then, you scoundrel, that together with Dmitri I meant tokill my father?”
“I didn’t know what thoughts were in your mind then,” said Smerdyakovresentfully; “and so I stopped you then at the gate to sound you on thatvery point.”
“To sound what, what?”
“Why, that very circumstance, whether you wanted your father to bemurdered or not.”
What infuriated Ivan more than anything was the aggressive, insolent toneto which Smerdyakov persistently adhered.
“It was you murdered him?” he cried suddenly.
Smerdyakov smiled contemptuously.
“You know of yourself, for a fact, that it wasn’t I murdered him. And Ishould have thought that there was no need for a sensible man to speak ofit again.”
“But why, why had you such a suspicion about me at the time?”
“As you know already, it was simply from fear. For I was in such aposition, shaking with fear, that I suspected every one. I resolved tosound you, too, for I thought if you wanted the same as your brother, thenthe business was as good as settled and I should be crushed like a fly,too.”
“Look here, you didn’t say that a fortnight ago.”
“I meant the same when I talked to you in the hospital, only I thoughtyou’d understand without wasting words, and that being such a sensible manyou wouldn’t care to talk of it openly.”
“What next! Come answer, answer, I insist: what was it ... what could Ihave done to put such a degrading suspicion into your mean soul?”
“As for the murder, you couldn’t have done that and didn’t want to, but asfor wanting some one else to do it, that was just what you did want.”
“And how coolly, how coolly he speaks! But why should I have wanted it;what grounds had I for wanting it?”
“What grounds had you? What about the inheritance?” said Smerdyakovsarcastically, and, as it were, vindictively. “Why, after your parent’sdeath there was at least forty thousand to come to each of you, and verylikely more, but if Fyodor Pavlovitch got married then to that lady,Agrafena Alexandrovna, she would have had all his capital made over to herdirectly after the wedding, for she’s plenty of sense, so that your parentwould not have left you two roubles between the three of you. And werethey far from a wedding, either? Not a hair’s‐breadth: that lady had onlyto lift her little finger and he would have run after her to church, withhis tongue out.”
Ivan restrained himself with painful effort.
“Very good,” he commented at last. “You see, I haven’t jumped up, Ihaven’t knocked you down, I haven’t killed you. Speak on. So, according toyou, I had fixed on Dmitri to do it; I was reckoning on him?”
“How could you help reckoning on him? If he killed him, then he would loseall the rights of a nobleman, his rank and property, and would go off toexile; so his share of the inheritance would come to you and your brotherAlexey Fyodorovitch in equal parts; so you’d each have not forty, butsixty thousand each. There’s not a doubt you did reckon on DmitriFyodorovitch.”
“What I put up with from you! Listen, scoundrel, if I had reckoned on anyone then, it would have been on you, not on Dmitri, and I swear I didexpect some wickedness from you ... at the time.... I remember myimpression!”
“I thought, too, for a minute, at the time, that you were reckoning on meas well,” said Smerdyakov, with a sarcastic grin. “So that it was just bythat more than anything you showed me what was in your mind. For if youhad a foreboding about me and yet went away, you as good as said to me,‘You can murder my parent, I won’t hinder you!’ ”
“You scoundrel! So that’s how you understood it!”
“It was all that going to Tchermashnya. Why! You were meaning to go toMoscow and refused all your father’s entreaties to go to Tchermashnya—andsimply at a foolish word from me you consented at once! What reason hadyou to consent to Tchermashnya? Since you went to Tchermashnya with noreason, simply at my word, it shows that you must have expected somethingfrom me.”
“No, I swear I didn’t!” shouted Ivan, grinding his teeth.
“You didn’t? Then you ought, as your father’s son, to have had me taken tothe lock‐up and thrashed at once for my words then ... or at least, tohave given me a punch in the face on the spot, but you were not a bitangry, if you please, and at once in a friendly way acted on my foolishword and went away, which was utterly absurd, for you ought to have stayedto save your parent’s life. How could I help drawing my conclusions?”
Ivan sat scowling, both his fists convulsively pressed on his knees.
“Yes, I am sorry I didn’t punch you in the face,” he said with a bittersmile. “I couldn’t have taken you to the lock‐up just then. Who would havebelieved me and what charge could I bring against you? But the punch inthe face ... oh, I’m sorry I didn’t think of it. Though blows areforbidden, I should have pounded your ugly face to a jelly.”
Smerdyakov looked at him almost with relish.
“In the ordinary occasions of life,” he said in the same complacent andsententious tone in which he had taunted Grigory and argued with him aboutreligion at Fyodor Pavlovitch’s table, “in the ordinary occasions of life,blows on the face are forbidden nowadays by law, and people have giventhem up, but in exceptional occasions of life people still fly to blows,not only among us but all over the world, be it even the fullest Republicof France, just as in the time of Adam and Eve, and they never will leaveoff, but you, even in an exceptional case, did not dare.”
“What are you learning French words for?” Ivan nodded towards theexercise‐book lying on the table.
“Why shouldn’t I learn them so as to improve my education, supposing thatI may myself chance to go some day to those happy parts of Europe?”
“Listen, monster.” Ivan’s eyes flashed and he trembled all over. “I am notafraid of your accusations; you can say what you like about me, and if Idon’t beat you to death, it’s simply because I suspect you of that crimeand I’ll drag you to justice. I’ll unmask you.”
“To my thinking, you’d better keep quiet, for what can you accuse me of,considering my absolute innocence? and who would believe you? Only if youbegin, I shall tell everything, too, for I must defend myself.”
“Do you think I am afraid of you now?”
“If the court doesn’t believe all I’ve said to you just now, the publicwill, and you will be ashamed.”
“That’s as much as to say, ‘It’s always worth while speaking to a sensibleman,’ eh?” snarled Ivan.
“You hit the mark, indeed. And you’d better be sensible.”
Ivan got up, shaking all over with indignation, put on his coat, andwithout replying further to Smerdyakov, without even looking at him,walked quickly out of the cottage. The cool evening air refreshed him.There was a bright moon in the sky. A nightmare of ideas and sensationsfilled his soul. “Shall I go at once and give information againstSmerdyakov? But what information can I give? He is not guilty, anyway. Onthe contrary, he’ll accuse me. And in fact, why did I set off forTchermashnya then? What for? What for?” Ivan asked himself. “Yes, ofcourse, I was expecting something and he is right....” And he rememberedfor the hundredth time how, on the last night in his father’s house, hehad listened on the stairs. But he remembered it now with such anguishthat he stood still on the spot as though he had been stabbed. “Yes, Iexpected it then, that’s true! I wanted the murder, I did want the murder!Did I want the murder? Did I want it? I must kill Smerdyakov! If I don’tdare kill Smerdyakov now, life is not worth living!”
Ivan did not go home, but went straight to Katerina Ivanovna and alarmedher by his appearance. He was like a madman. He repeated all hisconversation with Smerdyakov, every syllable of it. He couldn’t be calmed,however much she tried to soothe him: he kept walking about the room,speaking strangely, disconnectedly. At last he sat down, put his elbows onthe table, leaned his head on his hands and pronounced this strangesentence: “If it’s not Dmitri, but Smerdyakov who’s the murderer, I sharehis guilt, for I put him up to it. Whether I did, I don’t know yet. But ifhe is the murderer, and not Dmitri, then, of course, I am the murderer,too.”
When Katerina Ivanovna heard that, she got up from her seat without aword, went to her writing‐table, opened a box standing on it, took out asheet of paper and laid it before Ivan. This was the document of whichIvan spoke to Alyosha later on as a “conclusive proof” that Dmitri hadkilled his father. It was the letter written by Mitya to Katerina Ivanovnawhen he was drunk, on the very evening he met Alyosha at the crossroads onthe way to the monastery, after the scene at Katerina Ivanovna’s, whenGrushenka had insulted her. Then, parting from Alyosha, Mitya had rushedto Grushenka. I don’t know whether he saw her, but in the evening he wasat the “Metropolis,” where he got thoroughly drunk. Then he asked for penand paper and wrote a document of weighty consequences to himself. It wasa wordy, disconnected, frantic letter, a drunken letter in fact. It waslike the talk of a drunken man, who, on his return home, begins withextraordinary heat telling his wife or one of his household how he hasjust been insulted, what a rascal had just insulted him, what a finefellow he is on the other hand, and how he will pay that scoundrel out;and all that at great length, with great excitement and incoherence, withdrunken tears and blows on the table. The letter was written on a dirtypiece of ordinary paper of the cheapest kind. It had been provided by thetavern and there were figures scrawled on the back of it. There wasevidently not space enough for his drunken verbosity and Mitya not onlyfilled the margins but had written the last line right across the rest.The letter ran as follows:

    FATAL KATYA: To‐morrow I will get the money and repay your three    thousand and farewell, woman of great wrath, but farewell, too, my    love! Let us make an end! To‐morrow I shall try and get it from    every one, and if I can’t borrow it, I give you my word of honor I    shall go to my father and break his skull and take the money from    under the pillow, if only Ivan has gone. If I have to go to    Siberia for it, I’ll give you back your three thousand. And    farewell. I bow down to the ground before you, for I’ve been a    scoundrel to you. Forgive me! No, better not forgive me, you’ll be    happier and so shall I! Better Siberia than your love, for I love    another woman and you got to know her too well to‐day, so how can    you forgive? I will murder the man who’s robbed me! I’ll leave you    all and go to the East so as to see no one again. Not _her_    either, for you are not my only tormentress; she is too. Farewell!
    P.S.—I write my curse, but I adore you! I hear it in my heart. One    string is left, and it vibrates. Better tear my heart in two! I    shall kill myself, but first of all that cur. I shall tear three    thousand from him and fling it to you. Though I’ve been a    scoundrel to you, I am not a thief! You can expect three thousand.    The cur keeps it under his mattress, in pink ribbon. I am not a    thief, but I’ll murder my thief. Katya, don’t look disdainful.    Dmitri is not a thief! but a murderer! He has murdered his father    and ruined himself to hold his ground, rather than endure your    pride. And he doesn’t love you.
    P.P.S.—I kiss your feet, farewell! P.P.P.S.—Katya, pray to God    that some one’ll give me the money. Then I shall not be steeped in    gore, and if no one does—I shall! Kill me!
    Your slave and enemy,
    D. KARAMAZOV.

When Ivan read this “document” he was convinced. So then it was hisbrother, not Smerdyakov. And if not Smerdyakov, then not he, Ivan. Thisletter at once assumed in his eyes the aspect of a logical proof. Therecould be no longer the slightest doubt of Mitya’s guilt. The suspicionnever occurred to Ivan, by the way, that Mitya might have committed themurder in conjunction with Smerdyakov, and, indeed, such a theory did notfit in with the facts. Ivan was completely reassured. The next morning heonly thought of Smerdyakov and his gibes with contempt. A few days laterhe positively wondered how he could have been so horribly distressed athis suspicions. He resolved to dismiss him with contempt and forget him.So passed a month. He made no further inquiry about Smerdyakov, but twicehe happened to hear that he was very ill and out of his mind.
“He’ll end in madness,” the young doctor Varvinsky observed about him, andIvan remembered this. During the last week of that month Ivan himselfbegan to feel very ill. He went to consult the Moscow doctor who had beensent for by Katerina Ivanovna just before the trial. And just at that timehis relations with Katerina Ivanovna became acutely strained. They werelike two enemies in love with one another. Katerina Ivanovna’s “returns”to Mitya, that is, her brief but violent revulsions of feeling in hisfavor, drove Ivan to perfect frenzy. Strange to say, until that last scenedescribed above, when Alyosha came from Mitya to Katerina Ivanovna, Ivanhad never once, during that month, heard her express a doubt of Mitya’sguilt, in spite of those “returns” that were so hateful to him. It isremarkable, too, that while he felt that he hated Mitya more and moreevery day, he realized that it was not on account of Katya’s “returns”that he hated him, but just _because he was the murderer of his father_.He was conscious of this and fully recognized it to himself.
Nevertheless, he went to see Mitya ten days before the trial and proposedto him a plan of escape—a plan he had obviously thought over a long time.He was partly impelled to do this by a sore place still left in his heartfrom a phrase of Smerdyakov’s, that it was to his, Ivan’s, advantage thathis brother should be convicted, as that would increase his inheritanceand Alyosha’s from forty to sixty thousand roubles. He determined tosacrifice thirty thousand on arranging Mitya’s escape. On his return fromseeing him, he was very mournful and dispirited; he suddenly began to feelthat he was anxious for Mitya’s escape, not only to heal that sore placeby sacrificing thirty thousand, but for another reason. “Is it because Iam as much a murderer at heart?” he asked himself. Something very deepdown seemed burning and rankling in his soul. His pride above all sufferedcruelly all that month. But of that later....
When, after his conversation with Alyosha, Ivan suddenly decided with hishand on the bell of his lodging to go to Smerdyakov, he obeyed a suddenand peculiar impulse of indignation. He suddenly remembered how KaterinaIvanovna had only just cried out to him in Alyosha’s presence: “It wasyou, you, persuaded me of his” (that is, Mitya’s) “guilt!” Ivan wasthunderstruck when he recalled it. He had never once tried to persuade herthat Mitya was the murderer; on the contrary, he had suspected himself inher presence, that time when he came back from Smerdyakov. It was _she_,she, who had produced that “document” and proved his brother’s guilt. Andnow she suddenly exclaimed: “I’ve been at Smerdyakov’s myself!” When hadshe been there? Ivan had known nothing of it. So she was not at all sosure of Mitya’s guilt! And what could Smerdyakov have told her? What,what, had he said to her? His heart burned with violent anger. He couldnot understand how he could, half an hour before, have let those wordspass and not have cried out at the moment. He let go of the bell andrushed off to Smerdyakov. “I shall kill him, perhaps, this time,” hethought on the way.


Chapter VIII. The Third And Last Interview With Smerdyakov

When he was half‐way there, the keen dry wind that had been blowing earlythat morning rose again, and a fine dry snow began falling thickly. It didnot lie on the ground, but was whirled about by the wind, and soon therewas a regular snowstorm. There were scarcely any lamp‐posts in the part ofthe town where Smerdyakov lived. Ivan strode alone in the darkness,unconscious of the storm, instinctively picking out his way. His headached and there was a painful throbbing in his temples. He felt that hishands were twitching convulsively. Not far from Marya Kondratyevna’scottage, Ivan suddenly came upon a solitary drunken little peasant. He waswearing a coarse and patched coat, and was walking in zigzags, grumblingand swearing to himself. Then suddenly he would begin singing in a huskydrunken voice:

    “Ach, Vanka’s gone to Petersburg;    I won’t wait till he comes back.”

But he broke off every time at the second line and began swearing again;then he would begin the same song again. Ivan felt an intense hatred forhim before he had thought about him at all. Suddenly he realized hispresence and felt an irresistible impulse to knock him down. At thatmoment they met, and the peasant with a violent lurch fell full tiltagainst Ivan, who pushed him back furiously. The peasant went flyingbackwards and fell like a log on the frozen ground. He uttered oneplaintive “O—oh!” and then was silent. Ivan stepped up to him. He waslying on his back, without movement or consciousness. “He will be frozen,”thought Ivan, and he went on his way to Smerdyakov’s.
In the passage, Marya Kondratyevna, who ran out to open the door with acandle in her hand, whispered that Smerdyakov was very ill, “It’s not thathe’s laid up, but he seems not himself, and he even told us to take thetea away; he wouldn’t have any.”
“Why, does he make a row?” asked Ivan coarsely.
“Oh, dear, no, quite the contrary, he’s very quiet. Only please don’t talkto him too long,” Marya Kondratyevna begged him. Ivan opened the door andstepped into the room.
It was over‐heated as before, but there were changes in the room. One ofthe benches at the side had been removed, and in its place had been put alarge old mahogany leather sofa, on which a bed had been made up, withfairly clean white pillows. Smerdyakov was sitting on the sofa, wearingthe same dressing‐gown. The table had been brought out in front of thesofa, so that there was hardly room to move. On the table lay a thick bookin yellow cover, but Smerdyakov was not reading it. He seemed to besitting doing nothing. He met Ivan with a slow silent gaze, and wasapparently not at all surprised at his coming. There was a great change inhis face; he was much thinner and sallower. His eyes were sunken and therewere blue marks under them.
“Why, you really are ill?” Ivan stopped short. “I won’t keep you long, Iwon’t even take off my coat. Where can one sit down?”
He went to the other end of the table, moved up a chair and sat down onit.
“Why do you look at me without speaking? I’ve only come with one question,and I swear I won’t go without an answer. Has the young lady, KaterinaIvanovna, been with you?”
Smerdyakov still remained silent, looking quietly at Ivan as before.Suddenly, with a motion of his hand, he turned his face away.
“What’s the matter with you?” cried Ivan.
“Nothing.”
“What do you mean by ‘nothing’?”
“Yes, she has. It’s no matter to you. Let me alone.”
“No, I won’t let you alone. Tell me, when was she here?”
“Why, I’d quite forgotten about her,” said Smerdyakov, with a scornfulsmile, and turning his face to Ivan again, he stared at him with a look offrenzied hatred, the same look that he had fixed on him at their lastinterview, a month before.
“You seem very ill yourself, your face is sunken; you don’t look likeyourself,” he said to Ivan.
“Never mind my health, tell me what I ask you.”
“But why are your eyes so yellow? The whites are quite yellow. Are you soworried?” He smiled contemptuously and suddenly laughed outright.
“Listen; I’ve told you I won’t go away without an answer!” Ivan cried,intensely irritated.
“Why do you keep pestering me? Why do you torment me?” said Smerdyakov,with a look of suffering.
“Damn it! I’ve nothing to do with you. Just answer my question and I’ll goaway.”
“I’ve no answer to give you,” said Smerdyakov, looking down again.
“You may be sure I’ll make you answer!”
“Why are you so uneasy?” Smerdyakov stared at him, not simply withcontempt, but almost with repulsion. “Is this because the trial begins to‐morrow? Nothing will happen to you; can’t you believe that at last? Gohome, go to bed and sleep in peace, don’t be afraid of anything.”
“I don’t understand you.... What have I to be afraid of to‐morrow?” Ivanarticulated in astonishment, and suddenly a chill breath of fear did infact pass over his soul. Smerdyakov measured him with his eyes.
“You don’t understand?” he drawled reproachfully. “It’s a strange thing asensible man should care to play such a farce!”
Ivan looked at him speechless. The startling, incredibly supercilious toneof this man who had once been his valet, was extraordinary in itself. Hehad not taken such a tone even at their last interview.
“I tell you, you’ve nothing to be afraid of. I won’t say anything aboutyou; there’s no proof against you. I say, how your hands are trembling!Why are your fingers moving like that? Go home, _you_ did not murder him.”
Ivan started. He remembered Alyosha.
“I know it was not I,” he faltered.
“Do you?” Smerdyakov caught him up again.
Ivan jumped up and seized him by the shoulder.
“Tell me everything, you viper! Tell me everything!”
Smerdyakov was not in the least scared. He only riveted his eyes on Ivanwith insane hatred.
“Well, it was you who murdered him, if that’s it,” he whispered furiously.
Ivan sank back on his chair, as though pondering something. He laughedmalignantly.
“You mean my going away. What you talked about last time?”
“You stood before me last time and understood it all, and you understandit now.”
“All I understand is that you are mad.”
“Aren’t you tired of it? Here we are face to face; what’s the use of goingon keeping up a farce to each other? Are you still trying to throw it allon me, to my face? _You_ murdered him; you are the real murderer, I wasonly your instrument, your faithful servant, and it was following yourwords I did it.”
“_Did_ it? Why, did you murder him?” Ivan turned cold.
Something seemed to give way in his brain, and he shuddered all over witha cold shiver. Then Smerdyakov himself looked at him wonderingly; probablythe genuineness of Ivan’s horror struck him.
“You don’t mean to say you really did not know?” he falteredmistrustfully, looking with a forced smile into his eyes. Ivan still gazedat him, and seemed unable to speak.

    Ach, Vanka’s gone to Petersburg;    I won’t wait till he comes back,

suddenly echoed in his head.
“Do you know, I am afraid that you are a dream, a phantom sitting beforeme,” he muttered.
“There’s no phantom here, but only us two and one other. No doubt he ishere, that third, between us.”
“Who is he? Who is here? What third person?” Ivan cried in alarm, lookingabout him, his eyes hastily searching in every corner.
“That third is God Himself—Providence. He is the third beside us now. Onlydon’t look for Him, you won’t find Him.”
“It’s a lie that you killed him!” Ivan cried madly. “You are mad, orteasing me again!”
Smerdyakov, as before, watched him curiously, with no sign of fear. Hecould still scarcely get over his incredulity; he still fancied that Ivanknew everything and was trying to “throw it all on him to his face.”
“Wait a minute,” he said at last in a weak voice, and suddenly bringing uphis left leg from under the table, he began turning up his trouser leg. Hewas wearing long white stockings and slippers. Slowly he took off hisgarter and fumbled to the bottom of his stocking. Ivan gazed at him, andsuddenly shuddered in a paroxysm of terror.
“He’s mad!” he cried, and rapidly jumping up, he drew back, so that heknocked his back against the wall and stood up against it, stiff andstraight. He looked with insane terror at Smerdyakov, who, entirelyunaffected by his terror, continued fumbling in his stocking, as though hewere making an effort to get hold of something with his fingers and pullit out. At last he got hold of it and began pulling it out. Ivan saw thatit was a piece of paper, or perhaps a roll of papers. Smerdyakov pulled itout and laid it on the table.
“Here,” he said quietly.
“What is it?” asked Ivan, trembling.
“Kindly look at it,” Smerdyakov answered, still in the same low tone.
Ivan stepped up to the table, took up the roll of paper and beganunfolding it, but suddenly he drew back his fingers, as though fromcontact with a loathsome reptile.
“Your hands keep twitching,” observed Smerdyakov, and he deliberatelyunfolded the bundle himself. Under the wrapper were three packets ofhundred‐rouble notes.
“They are all here, all the three thousand roubles; you need not countthem. Take them,” Smerdyakov suggested to Ivan, nodding at the notes. Ivansank back in his chair. He was as white as a handkerchief.
“You frightened me ... with your stocking,” he said, with a strange grin.
“Can you really not have known till now?” Smerdyakov asked once more.
“No, I did not know. I kept thinking of Dmitri. Brother, brother! Ach!” Hesuddenly clutched his head in both hands.
“Listen. Did you kill him alone? With my brother’s help or without?”
“It was only with you, with your help, I killed him, and DmitriFyodorovitch is quite innocent.”
“All right, all right. Talk about me later. Why do I keep on trembling? Ican’t speak properly.”
“You were bold enough then. You said ‘everything was lawful,’ and howfrightened you are now,” Smerdyakov muttered in surprise. “Won’t you havesome lemonade? I’ll ask for some at once. It’s very refreshing. Only Imust hide this first.”
And again he motioned at the notes. He was just going to get up and callat the door to Marya Kondratyevna to make some lemonade and bring it them,but, looking for something to cover up the notes that she might not seethem, he first took out his handkerchief, and as it turned out to be verydirty, took up the big yellow book that Ivan had noticed at first lying onthe table, and put it over the notes. The book was _The Sayings of theHoly Father Isaac the Syrian_. Ivan read it mechanically.
“I won’t have any lemonade,” he said. “Talk of me later. Sit down and tellme how you did it. Tell me all about it.”
“You’d better take off your greatcoat, or you’ll be too hot.” Ivan, asthough he’d only just thought of it, took off his coat, and, withoutgetting up from his chair, threw it on the bench.
“Speak, please, speak.”
He seemed calmer. He waited, feeling sure that Smerdyakov would tell him_all_ about it.
“How it was done?” sighed Smerdyakov. “It was done in a most natural way,following your very words.”
“Of my words later,” Ivan broke in again, apparently with complete self‐possession, firmly uttering his words, and not shouting as before. “Onlytell me in detail how you did it. Everything, as it happened. Don’t forgetanything. The details, above everything, the details, I beg you.”
“You’d gone away, then I fell into the cellar.”
“In a fit or in a sham one?”
“A sham one, naturally. I shammed it all. I went quietly down the steps tothe very bottom and lay down quietly, and as I lay down I gave a scream,and struggled, till they carried me out.”
“Stay! And were you shamming all along, afterwards, and in the hospital?”
“No, not at all. Next day, in the morning, before they took me to thehospital, I had a real attack and a more violent one than I’ve had foryears. For two days I was quite unconscious.”
“All right, all right. Go on.”
“They laid me on the bed. I knew I’d be the other side of the partition,for whenever I was ill, Marfa Ignatyevna used to put me there, near them.She’s always been very kind to me, from my birth up. At night I moaned,but quietly. I kept expecting Dmitri Fyodorovitch to come.”
“Expecting him? To come to you?”
“Not to me. I expected him to come into the house, for I’d no doubt thathe’d come that night, for being without me and getting no news, he’d besure to come and climb over the fence, as he used to, and do something.”
“And if he hadn’t come?”
“Then nothing would have happened. I should never have brought myself toit without him.”
“All right, all right ... speak more intelligibly, don’t hurry; above all,don’t leave anything out!”
“I expected him to kill Fyodor Pavlovitch. I thought that was certain, forI had prepared him for it ... during the last few days.... He knew aboutthe knocks, that was the chief thing. With his suspiciousness and the furywhich had been growing in him all those days, he was bound to get into thehouse by means of those taps. That was inevitable, so I was expectinghim.”
“Stay,” Ivan interrupted; “if he had killed him, he would have taken themoney and carried it away; you must have considered that. What would youhave got by it afterwards? I don’t see.”
“But he would never have found the money. That was only what I told him,that the money was under the mattress. But that wasn’t true. It had beenlying in a box. And afterwards I suggested to Fyodor Pavlovitch, as I wasthe only person he trusted, to hide the envelope with the notes in thecorner behind the ikons, for no one would have guessed that place,especially if they came in a hurry. So that’s where the envelope lay, inthe corner behind the ikons. It would have been absurd to keep it underthe mattress; the box, anyway, could be locked. But all believe it wasunder the mattress. A stupid thing to believe. So if Dmitri Fyodorovitchhad committed the murder, finding nothing, he would either have run awayin a hurry, afraid of every sound, as always happens with murderers, or hewould have been arrested. So I could always have clambered up to the ikonsand have taken away the money next morning or even that night, and itwould have all been put down to Dmitri Fyodorovitch. I could reckon uponthat.”
“But what if he did not kill him, but only knocked him down?”
“If he did not kill him, of course, I would not have ventured to take themoney, and nothing would have happened. But I calculated that he wouldbeat him senseless, and I should have time to take it then, and then I’dmake out to Fyodor Pavlovitch that it was no one but Dmitri Fyodorovitchwho had taken the money after beating him.”
“Stop ... I am getting mixed. Then it was Dmitri after all who killed him;you only took the money?”
“No, he didn’t kill him. Well, I might as well have told you now that hewas the murderer.... But I don’t want to lie to you now, because ...because if you really haven’t understood till now, as I see for myself,and are not pretending, so as to throw your guilt on me to my very face,you are still responsible for it all, since you knew of the murder andcharged me to do it, and went away knowing all about it. And so I want toprove to your face this evening that you are the only real murderer in thewhole affair, and I am not the real murderer, though I did kill him. Youare the rightful murderer.”
“Why, why, am I a murderer? Oh, God!” Ivan cried, unable to restrainhimself at last, and forgetting that he had put off discussing himselftill the end of the conversation. “You still mean that Tchermashnya? Stay,tell me, why did you want my consent, if you really took Tchermashnya forconsent? How will you explain that now?”
“Assured of your consent, I should have known that you wouldn’t have madean outcry over those three thousand being lost, even if I’d beensuspected, instead of Dmitri Fyodorovitch, or as his accomplice; on thecontrary, you would have protected me from others.... And when you gotyour inheritance you would have rewarded me when you were able, all therest of your life. For you’d have received your inheritance through me,seeing that if he had married Agrafena Alexandrovna, you wouldn’t have hada farthing.”
“Ah! Then you intended to worry me all my life afterwards,” snarled Ivan.“And what if I hadn’t gone away then, but had informed against you?”
“What could you have informed? That I persuaded you to go to Tchermashnya?That’s all nonsense. Besides, after our conversation you would either havegone away or have stayed. If you had stayed, nothing would have happened.I should have known that you didn’t want it done, and should haveattempted nothing. As you went away, it meant you assured me that youwouldn’t dare to inform against me at the trial, and that you’d overlookmy having the three thousand. And, indeed, you couldn’t have prosecuted meafterwards, because then I should have told it all in the court; that is,not that I had stolen the money or killed him—I shouldn’t have saidthat—but that you’d put me up to the theft and the murder, though I didn’tconsent to it. That’s why I needed your consent, so that you couldn’t havecornered me afterwards, for what proof could you have had? I could alwayshave cornered you, revealing your eagerness for your father’s death, and Itell you the public would have believed it all, and you would have beenashamed for the rest of your life.”
“Was I then so eager, was I?” Ivan snarled again.
“To be sure you were, and by your consent you silently sanctioned my doingit.” Smerdyakov looked resolutely at Ivan. He was very weak and spokeslowly and wearily, but some hidden inner force urged him on. He evidentlyhad some design. Ivan felt that.
“Go on,” he said. “Tell me what happened that night.”
“What more is there to tell! I lay there and I thought I heard the mastershout. And before that Grigory Vassilyevitch had suddenly got up and cameout, and he suddenly gave a scream, and then all was silence and darkness.I lay there waiting, my heart beating; I couldn’t bear it. I got up atlast, went out. I saw the window open on the left into the garden, and Istepped to the left to listen whether he was sitting there alive, and Iheard the master moving about, sighing, so I knew he was alive. ‘Ech!’ Ithought. I went to the window and shouted to the master, ‘It’s I.’ And heshouted to me, ‘He’s been, he’s been; he’s run away.’ He meant DmitriFyodorovitch had been. ‘He’s killed Grigory!’ ‘Where?’ I whispered.‘There, in the corner,’ he pointed. He was whispering, too. ‘Wait a bit,’I said. I went to the corner of the garden to look, and there I came uponGrigory Vassilyevitch lying by the wall, covered with blood, senseless. Soit’s true that Dmitri Fyodorovitch has been here, was the thought thatcame into my head, and I determined on the spot to make an end of it, asGrigory Vassilyevitch, even if he were alive, would see nothing of it, ashe lay there senseless. The only risk was that Marfa Ignatyevna might wakeup. I felt that at the moment, but the longing to get it done came overme, till I could scarcely breathe. I went back to the window to the masterand said, ‘She’s here, she’s come; Agrafena Alexandrovna has come, wantsto be let in.’ And he started like a baby. ‘Where is she?’ he fairlygasped, but couldn’t believe it. ‘She’s standing there,’ said I. ‘Open.’He looked out of the window at me, half believing and half distrustful,but afraid to open. ‘Why, he is afraid of me now,’ I thought. And it wasfunny. I bethought me to knock on the window‐frame those taps we’d agreedupon as a signal that Grushenka had come, in his presence, before hiseyes. He didn’t seem to believe my word, but as soon as he heard the taps,he ran at once to open the door. He opened it. I would have gone in, buthe stood in the way to prevent me passing. ‘Where is she? Where is she?’He looked at me, all of a tremble. ‘Well,’ thought I, ‘if he’s sofrightened of me as all that, it’s a bad look out!’ And my legs went weakwith fright that he wouldn’t let me in or would call out, or MarfaIgnatyevna would run up, or something else might happen. I don’t remembernow, but I must have stood pale, facing him. I whispered to him, ‘Why,she’s there, there, under the window; how is it you don’t see her?’ Isaid. ‘Bring her then, bring her.’ ‘She’s afraid,’ said I; ‘she wasfrightened at the noise, she’s hidden in the bushes; go and call to heryourself from the study.’ He ran to the window, put the candle in thewindow. ‘Grushenka,’ he cried, ‘Grushenka, are you here?’ Though he criedthat, he didn’t want to lean out of the window, he didn’t want to moveaway from me, for he was panic‐stricken; he was so frightened he didn’tdare to turn his back on me. ‘Why, here she is,’ said I. I went up to thewindow and leaned right out of it. ‘Here she is; she’s in the bush,laughing at you, don’t you see her?’ He suddenly believed it; he was allof a shake—he was awfully crazy about her—and he leaned right out of thewindow. I snatched up that iron paper‐weight from his table; do youremember, weighing about three pounds? I swung it and hit him on the topof the skull with the corner of it. He didn’t even cry out. He only sankdown suddenly, and I hit him again and a third time. And the third time Iknew I’d broken his skull. He suddenly rolled on his back, face upwards,covered with blood. I looked round. There was no blood on me, not a spot.I wiped the paper‐weight, put it back, went up to the ikons, took themoney out of the envelope, and flung the envelope on the floor and thepink ribbon beside it. I went out into the garden all of a tremble,straight to the apple‐tree with a hollow in it—you know that hollow. I’dmarked it long before and put a rag and a piece of paper ready in it. Iwrapped all the notes in the rag and stuffed it deep down in the hole. Andthere it stayed for over a fortnight. I took it out later, when I came outof the hospital. I went back to my bed, lay down and thought, ‘If GrigoryVassilyevitch has been killed outright it may be a bad job for me, but ifhe is not killed and recovers, it will be first‐rate, for then he’ll bearwitness that Dmitri Fyodorovitch has been here, and so he must have killedhim and taken the money.’ Then I began groaning with suspense andimpatience, so as to wake Marfa Ignatyevna as soon as possible. At lastshe got up and she rushed to me, but when she saw Grigory Vassilyevitchwas not there, she ran out, and I heard her scream in the garden. And thatset it all going and set my mind at rest.”
He stopped. Ivan had listened all the time in dead silence withoutstirring or taking his eyes off him. As he told his story Smerdyakovglanced at him from time to time, but for the most part kept his eyesaverted. When he had finished he was evidently agitated and was breathinghard. The perspiration stood out on his face. But it was impossible totell whether it was remorse he was feeling, or what.
“Stay,” cried Ivan, pondering. “What about the door? If he only opened thedoor to you, how could Grigory have seen it open before? For Grigory sawit before you went.”
It was remarkable that Ivan spoke quite amicably, in a different tone, notangry as before, so if any one had opened the door at that moment andpeeped in at them, he would certainly have concluded that they weretalking peaceably about some ordinary, though interesting, subject.
“As for that door and Grigory Vassilyevitch’s having seen it open, that’sonly his fancy,” said Smerdyakov, with a wry smile. “He is not a man, Iassure you, but an obstinate mule. He didn’t see it, but fancied he hadseen it, and there’s no shaking him. It’s just our luck he took thatnotion into his head, for they can’t fail to convict Dmitri Fyodorovitchafter that.”
“Listen ...” said Ivan, beginning to seem bewildered again and making aneffort to grasp something. “Listen. There are a lot of questions I want toask you, but I forget them ... I keep forgetting and getting mixed up.Yes. Tell me this at least, why did you open the envelope and leave itthere on the floor? Why didn’t you simply carry off the envelope?... Whenyou were telling me, I thought you spoke about it as though it were theright thing to do ... but why, I can’t understand....”
“I did that for a good reason. For if a man had known all about it, as Idid for instance, if he’d seen those notes before, and perhaps had putthem in that envelope himself, and had seen the envelope sealed up andaddressed, with his own eyes, if such a man had done the murder, whatshould have made him tear open the envelope afterwards, especially in suchdesperate haste, since he’d know for certain the notes must be in theenvelope? No, if the robber had been some one like me, he’d simply haveput the envelope straight in his pocket and got away with it as fast as hecould. But it’d be quite different with Dmitri Fyodorovitch. He only knewabout the envelope by hearsay; he had never seen it, and if he’d found it,for instance, under the mattress, he’d have torn it open as quickly aspossible to make sure the notes were in it. And he’d have thrown theenvelope down, without having time to think that it would be evidenceagainst him. Because he was not an habitual thief and had never directlystolen anything before, for he is a gentleman born, and if he did bringhimself to steal, it would not be regular stealing, but simply taking whatwas his own, for he’d told the whole town he meant to before, and had evenbragged aloud before every one that he’d go and take his property fromFyodor Pavlovitch. I didn’t say that openly to the prosecutor when I wasbeing examined, but quite the contrary, I brought him to it by a hint, asthough I didn’t see it myself, and as though he’d thought of it himselfand I hadn’t prompted him; so that Mr. Prosecutor’s mouth positivelywatered at my suggestion.”
“But can you possibly have thought of all that on the spot?” cried Ivan,overcome with astonishment. He looked at Smerdyakov again with alarm.
“Mercy on us! Could any one think of it all in such a desperate hurry? Itwas all thought out beforehand.”
“Well ... well, it was the devil helped you!” Ivan cried again. “No, youare not a fool, you are far cleverer than I thought....”
He got up, obviously intending to walk across the room. He was in terribledistress. But as the table blocked his way, and there was hardly room topass between the table and the wall, he only turned round where he stoodand sat down again. Perhaps the impossibility of moving irritated him, ashe suddenly cried out almost as furiously as before.
“Listen, you miserable, contemptible creature! Don’t you understand thatif I haven’t killed you, it’s simply because I am keeping you to answerto‐morrow at the trial. God sees,” Ivan raised his hand, “perhaps I, too,was guilty; perhaps I really had a secret desire for my father’s ...death, but I swear I was not as guilty as you think, and perhaps I didn’turge you on at all. No, no, I didn’t urge you on! But no matter, I willgive evidence against myself to‐morrow at the trial. I’m determined to! Ishall tell everything, everything. But we’ll make our appearance together.And whatever you may say against me at the trial, whatever evidence yougive, I’ll face it; I am not afraid of you. I’ll confirm it all myself!But you must confess, too! You must, you must; we’ll go together. That’show it shall be!”
Ivan said this solemnly and resolutely and from his flashing eyes alone itcould be seen that it would be so.
“You are ill, I see; you are quite ill. Your eyes are yellow,” Smerdyakovcommented, without the least irony, with apparent sympathy in fact.
“We’ll go together,” Ivan repeated. “And if you won’t go, no matter, I’llgo alone.”
Smerdyakov paused as though pondering.
“There’ll be nothing of the sort, and you won’t go,” he concluded at lastpositively.
“You don’t understand me,” Ivan exclaimed reproachfully.
“You’ll be too much ashamed, if you confess it all. And, what’s more, itwill be no use at all, for I shall say straight out that I never saidanything of the sort to you, and that you are either ill (and it lookslike it, too), or that you’re so sorry for your brother that you aresacrificing yourself to save him and have invented it all against me, foryou’ve always thought no more of me than if I’d been a fly. And who willbelieve you, and what single proof have you got?”
“Listen, you showed me those notes just now to convince me.”
Smerdyakov lifted the book off the notes and laid it on one side.
“Take that money away with you,” Smerdyakov sighed.
“Of course, I shall take it. But why do you give it to me, if youcommitted the murder for the sake of it?” Ivan looked at him with greatsurprise.
“I don’t want it,” Smerdyakov articulated in a shaking voice, with agesture of refusal. “I did have an idea of beginning a new life with thatmoney in Moscow or, better still, abroad. I did dream of it, chieflybecause ‘all things are lawful.’ That was quite right what you taught me,for you talked a lot to me about that. For if there’s no everlasting God,there’s no such thing as virtue, and there’s no need of it. You were rightthere. So that’s how I looked at it.”
“Did you come to that of yourself?” asked Ivan, with a wry smile.
“With your guidance.”
“And now, I suppose, you believe in God, since you are giving back themoney?”
“No, I don’t believe,” whispered Smerdyakov.
“Then why are you giving it back?”
“Leave off ... that’s enough!” Smerdyakov waved his hand again. “You usedto say yourself that everything was lawful, so now why are you so upset,too? You even want to go and give evidence against yourself.... Onlythere’ll be nothing of the sort! You won’t go to give evidence,”Smerdyakov decided with conviction.
“You’ll see,” said Ivan.
“It isn’t possible. You are very clever. You are fond of money, I knowthat. You like to be respected, too, for you’re very proud; you are fartoo fond of female charms, too, and you mind most of all about living inundisturbed comfort, without having to depend on any one—that’s what youcare most about. You won’t want to spoil your life for ever by taking sucha disgrace on yourself. You are like Fyodor Pavlovitch, you are more likehim than any of his children; you’ve the same soul as he had.”
“You are not a fool,” said Ivan, seeming struck. The blood rushed to hisface. “You are serious now!” he observed, looking suddenly at Smerdyakovwith a different expression.
“It was your pride made you think I was a fool. Take the money.”
Ivan took the three rolls of notes and put them in his pocket withoutwrapping them in anything.
“I shall show them at the court to‐morrow,” he said.
“Nobody will believe you, as you’ve plenty of money of your own; you maysimply have taken it out of your cash‐box and brought it to the court.”
Ivan rose from his seat.
“I repeat,” he said, “the only reason I haven’t killed you is that I needyou for to‐morrow, remember that, don’t forget it!”
“Well, kill me. Kill me now,” Smerdyakov said, all at once lookingstrangely at Ivan. “You won’t dare do that even!” he added, with a bittersmile. “You won’t dare to do anything, you, who used to be so bold!”
“Till to‐morrow,” cried Ivan, and moved to go out.
“Stay a moment.... Show me those notes again.”
Ivan took out the notes and showed them to him. Smerdyakov looked at themfor ten seconds.
“Well, you can go,” he said, with a wave of his hand. “Ivan Fyodorovitch!”he called after him again.
“What do you want?” Ivan turned without stopping.
“Good‐by!”
“Till to‐morrow!” Ivan cried again, and he walked out of the cottage.
The snowstorm was still raging. He walked the first few steps boldly, butsuddenly began staggering. “It’s something physical,” he thought with agrin. Something like joy was springing up in his heart. He was consciousof unbounded resolution; he would make an end of the wavering that had sotortured him of late. His determination was taken, “and now it will not bechanged,” he thought with relief. At that moment he stumbled againstsomething and almost fell down. Stopping short, he made out at his feetthe peasant he had knocked down, still lying senseless and motionless. Thesnow had almost covered his face. Ivan seized him and lifted him in hisarms. Seeing a light in the little house to the right he went up, knockedat the shutters, and asked the man to whom the house belonged to help himcarry the peasant to the police‐station, promising him three roubles. Theman got ready and came out. I won’t describe in detail how Ivan succeededin his object, bringing the peasant to the police‐station and arrangingfor a doctor to see him at once, providing with a liberal hand for theexpenses. I will only say that this business took a whole hour, but Ivanwas well content with it. His mind wandered and worked incessantly.
“If I had not taken my decision so firmly for to‐morrow,” he reflectedwith satisfaction, “I should not have stayed a whole hour to look afterthe peasant, but should have passed by, without caring about his beingfrozen. I am quite capable of watching myself, by the way,” he thought atthe same instant, with still greater satisfaction, “although they havedecided that I am going out of my mind!”
Just as he reached his own house he stopped short, asking himself suddenlyhadn’t he better go at once to the prosecutor and tell him everything. Hedecided the question by turning back to the house. “Everything togetherto‐morrow!” he whispered to himself, and, strange to say, almost all hisgladness and self‐satisfaction passed in one instant.
As he entered his own room he felt something like a touch of ice on hisheart, like a recollection or, more exactly, a reminder, of somethingagonizing and revolting that was in that room now, at that moment, and hadbeen there before. He sank wearily on his sofa. The old woman brought hima samovar; he made tea, but did not touch it. He sat on the sofa and feltgiddy. He felt that he was ill and helpless. He was beginning to dropasleep, but got up uneasily and walked across the room to shake off hisdrowsiness. At moments he fancied he was delirious, but it was not illnessthat he thought of most. Sitting down again, he began looking round, asthough searching for something. This happened several times. At last hiseyes were fastened intently on one point. Ivan smiled, but an angry flushsuffused his face. He sat a long time in his place, his head propped onboth arms, though he looked sideways at the same point, at the sofa thatstood against the opposite wall. There was evidently something, someobject, that irritated him there, worried him and tormented him.


Chapter IX. The Devil. Ivan’s Nightmare

I am not a doctor, but yet I feel that the moment has come when I mustinevitably give the reader some account of the nature of Ivan’s illness.Anticipating events I can say at least one thing: he was at that moment onthe very eve of an attack of brain fever. Though his health had long beenaffected, it had offered a stubborn resistance to the fever which in theend gained complete mastery over it. Though I know nothing of medicine, Iventure to hazard the suggestion that he really had perhaps, by a terribleeffort of will, succeeded in delaying the attack for a time, hoping, ofcourse, to check it completely. He knew that he was unwell, but he loathedthe thought of being ill at that fatal time, at the approaching crisis inhis life, when he needed to have all his wits about him, to say what hehad to say boldly and resolutely and “to justify himself to himself.”
He had, however, consulted the new doctor, who had been brought fromMoscow by a fantastic notion of Katerina Ivanovna’s to which I havereferred already. After listening to him and examining him the doctor cameto the conclusion that he was actually suffering from some disorder of thebrain, and was not at all surprised by an admission which Ivan hadreluctantly made him. “Hallucinations are quite likely in your condition,”the doctor opined, “though it would be better to verify them ... you musttake steps at once, without a moment’s delay, or things will go badly withyou.” But Ivan did not follow this judicious advice and did not take tohis bed to be nursed. “I am walking about, so I am strong enough, if Idrop, it’ll be different then, any one may nurse me who likes,” hedecided, dismissing the subject.
And so he was sitting almost conscious himself of his delirium and, as Ihave said already, looking persistently at some object on the sofa againstthe opposite wall. Some one appeared to be sitting there, though goodnessknows how he had come in, for he had not been in the room when Ivan cameinto it, on his return from Smerdyakov. This was a person or, moreaccurately speaking, a Russian gentleman of a particular kind, no longeryoung, _qui faisait la cinquantaine_, as the French say, with rather long,still thick, dark hair, slightly streaked with gray and a small pointedbeard. He was wearing a brownish reefer jacket, rather shabby, evidentlymade by a good tailor though, and of a fashion at least three years old,that had been discarded by smart and well‐to‐do people for the last twoyears. His linen and his long scarf‐like neck‐tie were all such as areworn by people who aim at being stylish, but on closer inspection hislinen was not over‐clean and his wide scarf was very threadbare. Thevisitor’s check trousers were of excellent cut, but were too light incolor and too tight for the present fashion. His soft fluffy white hat wasout of keeping with the season.
In brief there was every appearance of gentility on straitened means. Itlooked as though the gentleman belonged to that class of idle landownerswho used to flourish in the times of serfdom. He had unmistakably been, atsome time, in good and fashionable society, had once had good connections,had possibly preserved them indeed, but, after a gay youth, becominggradually impoverished on the abolition of serfdom, he had sunk into theposition of a poor relation of the best class, wandering from one good oldfriend to another and received by them for his companionable andaccommodating disposition and as being, after all, a gentleman who couldbe asked to sit down with any one, though, of course, not in a place ofhonor. Such gentlemen of accommodating temper and dependent position, whocan tell a story, take a hand at cards, and who have a distinct aversionfor any duties that may be forced upon them, are usually solitarycreatures, either bachelors or widowers. Sometimes they have children, butif so, the children are always being brought up at a distance, at someaunt’s, to whom these gentlemen never allude in good society, seemingashamed of the relationship. They gradually lose sight of their childrenaltogether, though at intervals they receive a birthday or Christmasletter from them and sometimes even answer it.
The countenance of the unexpected visitor was not so much good‐natured, asaccommodating and ready to assume any amiable expression as occasion mightarise. He had no watch, but he had a tortoise‐shell lorgnette on a blackribbon. On the middle finger of his right hand was a massive gold ringwith a cheap opal stone in it.
Ivan was angrily silent and would not begin the conversation. The visitorwaited and sat exactly like a poor relation who had come down from hisroom to keep his host company at tea, and was discreetly silent, seeingthat his host was frowning and preoccupied. But he was ready for anyaffable conversation as soon as his host should begin it. All at once hisface expressed a sudden solicitude.
“I say,” he began to Ivan, “excuse me, I only mention it to remind you.You went to Smerdyakov’s to find out about Katerina Ivanovna, but you cameaway without finding out anything about her, you probably forgot—”
“Ah, yes,” broke from Ivan and his face grew gloomy with uneasiness. “Yes,I’d forgotten ... but it doesn’t matter now, never mind, till to‐morrow,”he muttered to himself, “and you,” he added, addressing his visitor, “Ishould have remembered that myself in a minute, for that was just what wastormenting me! Why do you interfere, as if I should believe that youprompted me, and that I didn’t remember it of myself?”
“Don’t believe it then,” said the gentleman, smiling amicably, “what’s thegood of believing against your will? Besides, proofs are no help tobelieving, especially material proofs. Thomas believed, not because he sawChrist risen, but because he wanted to believe, before he saw. Look at thespiritualists, for instance.... I am very fond of them ... only fancy,they imagine that they are serving the cause of religion, because thedevils show them their horns from the other world. That, they say, is amaterial proof, so to speak, of the existence of another world. The otherworld and material proofs, what next! And if you come to that, doesproving there’s a devil prove that there’s a God? I want to join anidealist society, I’ll lead the opposition in it, I’ll say I am a realist,but not a materialist, he he!”
“Listen,” Ivan suddenly got up from the table. “I seem to be delirious....I am delirious, in fact, talk any nonsense you like, I don’t care! Youwon’t drive me to fury, as you did last time. But I feel somehowashamed.... I want to walk about the room.... I sometimes don’t see youand don’t even hear your voice as I did last time, but I always guess whatyou are prating, for it’s I, _I myself speaking, not you_. Only I don’tknow whether I was dreaming last time or whether I really saw you. I’llwet a towel and put it on my head and perhaps you’ll vanish into air.”
Ivan went into the corner, took a towel, and did as he said, and with awet towel on his head began walking up and down the room.
“I am so glad you treat me so familiarly,” the visitor began.
“Fool,” laughed Ivan, “do you suppose I should stand on ceremony with you?I am in good spirits now, though I’ve a pain in my forehead ... and in thetop of my head ... only please don’t talk philosophy, as you did lasttime. If you can’t take yourself off, talk of something amusing. Talkgossip, you are a poor relation, you ought to talk gossip. What anightmare to have! But I am not afraid of you. I’ll get the better of you.I won’t be taken to a mad‐house!”
“_C’est charmant_, poor relation. Yes, I am in my natural shape. For whatam I on earth but a poor relation? By the way, I am listening to you andam rather surprised to find you are actually beginning to take me forsomething real, not simply your fancy, as you persisted in declaring lasttime—”
“Never for one minute have I taken you for reality,” Ivan cried with asort of fury. “You are a lie, you are my illness, you are a phantom. It’sonly that I don’t know how to destroy you and I see I must suffer for atime. You are my hallucination. You are the incarnation of myself, butonly of one side of me ... of my thoughts and feelings, but only thenastiest and stupidest of them. From that point of view you might be ofinterest to me, if only I had time to waste on you—”
“Excuse me, excuse me, I’ll catch you. When you flew out at Alyosha underthe lamp‐post this evening and shouted to him, ‘You learnt it from _him_!How do you know that _he_ visits me?’ you were thinking of me then. So forone brief moment you did believe that I really exist,” the gentlemanlaughed blandly.
“Yes, that was a moment of weakness ... but I couldn’t believe in you. Idon’t know whether I was asleep or awake last time. Perhaps I was onlydreaming then and didn’t see you really at all—”
“And why were you so surly with Alyosha just now? He is a dear; I’vetreated him badly over Father Zossima.”
“Don’t talk of Alyosha! How dare you, you flunkey!” Ivan laughed again.
“You scold me, but you laugh—that’s a good sign. But you are ever so muchmore polite than you were last time and I know why: that great resolutionof yours—”
“Don’t speak of my resolution,” cried Ivan, savagely.
“I understand, I understand, _c’est noble, c’est charmant_, you are goingto defend your brother and to sacrifice yourself ... _C’estchevaleresque_.”
“Hold your tongue, I’ll kick you!”
“I shan’t be altogether sorry, for then my object will be attained. If youkick me, you must believe in my reality, for people don’t kick ghosts.Joking apart, it doesn’t matter to me, scold if you like, though it’sbetter to be a trifle more polite even to me. ‘Fool, flunkey!’ whatwords!”
“Scolding you, I scold myself,” Ivan laughed again, “you are myself,myself, only with a different face. You just say what I am thinking ...and are incapable of saying anything new!”
“If I am like you in my way of thinking, it’s all to my credit,” thegentleman declared, with delicacy and dignity.
“You choose out only my worst thoughts, and what’s more, the stupid ones.You are stupid and vulgar. You are awfully stupid. No, I can’t put up withyou! What am I to do, what am I to do?” Ivan said through his clenchedteeth.
“My dear friend, above all things I want to behave like a gentleman and tobe recognized as such,” the visitor began in an excess of deprecating andsimple‐hearted pride, typical of a poor relation. “I am poor, but ... Iwon’t say very honest, but ... it’s an axiom generally accepted in societythat I am a fallen angel. I certainly can’t conceive how I can ever havebeen an angel. If I ever was, it must have been so long ago that there’sno harm in forgetting it. Now I only prize the reputation of being agentlemanly person and live as I can, trying to make myself agreeable. Ilove men genuinely, I’ve been greatly calumniated! Here when I stay withyou from time to time, my life gains a kind of reality and that’s what Ilike most of all. You see, like you, I suffer from the fantastic and so Ilove the realism of earth. Here, with you, everything is circumscribed,here all is formulated and geometrical, while we have nothing butindeterminate equations! I wander about here dreaming. I like dreaming.Besides, on earth I become superstitious. Please don’t laugh, that’s justwhat I like, to become superstitious. I adopt all your habits here: I’vegrown fond of going to the public baths, would you believe it? and I goand steam myself with merchants and priests. What I dream of is becomingincarnate once for all and irrevocably in the form of some merchant’s wifeweighing eighteen stone, and of believing all she believes. My ideal is togo to church and offer a candle in simple‐hearted faith, upon my word itis. Then there would be an end to my sufferings. I like being doctoredtoo; in the spring there was an outbreak of smallpox and I went and wasvaccinated in a foundling hospital—if only you knew how I enjoyed myselfthat day. I subscribed ten roubles in the cause of the Slavs!... But youare not listening. Do you know, you are not at all well this evening? Iknow you went yesterday to that doctor ... well, what about your health?What did the doctor say?”
“Fool!” Ivan snapped out.
“But you are clever, anyway. You are scolding again? I didn’t ask out ofsympathy. You needn’t answer. Now rheumatism has come in again—”
“Fool!” repeated Ivan.
“You keep saying the same thing; but I had such an attack of rheumatismlast year that I remember it to this day.”
“The devil have rheumatism!”
“Why not, if I sometimes put on fleshly form? I put on fleshly form and Itake the consequences. Satan _sum et nihil humanum a me alienum puto_.”
“What, what, Satan _sum et nihil humanum_ ... that’s not bad for thedevil!”
“I am glad I’ve pleased you at last.”
“But you didn’t get that from me.” Ivan stopped suddenly, seeming struck.“That never entered my head, that’s strange.”
“_C’est du nouveau, n’est‐ce pas?_ This time I’ll act honestly and explainto you. Listen, in dreams and especially in nightmares, from indigestionor anything, a man sees sometimes such artistic visions, such complex andreal actuality, such events, even a whole world of events, woven into sucha plot, with such unexpected details from the most exalted matters to thelast button on a cuff, as I swear Leo Tolstoy has never invented. Yet suchdreams are sometimes seen not by writers, but by the most ordinary people,officials, journalists, priests.... The subject is a complete enigma. Astatesman confessed to me, indeed, that all his best ideas came to himwhen he was asleep. Well, that’s how it is now, though I am yourhallucination, yet just as in a nightmare, I say original things which hadnot entered your head before. So I don’t repeat your ideas, yet I am onlyyour nightmare, nothing more.”
“You are lying, your aim is to convince me you exist apart and are not mynightmare, and now you are asserting you are a dream.”
“My dear fellow, I’ve adopted a special method to‐day, I’ll explain it toyou afterwards. Stay, where did I break off? Oh, yes! I caught cold then,only not here but yonder.”
“Where is yonder? Tell me, will you be here long? Can’t you go away?” Ivanexclaimed almost in despair. He ceased walking to and fro, sat down on thesofa, leaned his elbows on the table again and held his head tight in bothhands. He pulled the wet towel off and flung it away in vexation. It wasevidently of no use.
“Your nerves are out of order,” observed the gentleman, with a carelesslyeasy, though perfectly polite, air. “You are angry with me even for beingable to catch cold, though it happened in a most natural way. I washurrying then to a diplomatic _soirée_ at the house of a lady of high rankin Petersburg, who was aiming at influence in the Ministry. Well, anevening suit, white tie, gloves, though I was God knows where and had tofly through space to reach your earth.... Of course, it took only aninstant, but you know a ray of light from the sun takes full eightminutes, and fancy in an evening suit and open waistcoat. Spirits don’tfreeze, but when one’s in fleshly form, well ... in brief, I didn’t think,and set off, and you know in those ethereal spaces, in the water that isabove the firmament, there’s such a frost ... at least one can’t call itfrost, you can fancy, 150 degrees below zero! You know the game thevillage girls play—they invite the unwary to lick an ax in thirty degreesof frost, the tongue instantly freezes to it and the dupe tears the skinoff, so it bleeds. But that’s only in 30 degrees, in 150 degrees I imagineit would be enough to put your finger on the ax and it would be the end ofit ... if only there could be an ax there.”
“And can there be an ax there?” Ivan interrupted, carelessly anddisdainfully. He was exerting himself to the utmost not to believe in thedelusion and not to sink into complete insanity.
“An ax?” the guest interrupted in surprise.
“Yes, what would become of an ax there?” Ivan cried suddenly, with a sortof savage and insistent obstinacy.
“What would become of an ax in space? _Quelle idée!_ If it were to fall toany distance, it would begin, I think, flying round the earth withoutknowing why, like a satellite. The astronomers would calculate the risingand the setting of the ax, _Gatzuk_ would put it in his calendar, that’sall.”
“You are stupid, awfully stupid,” said Ivan peevishly. “Fib more cleverlyor I won’t listen. You want to get the better of me by realism, toconvince me that you exist, but I don’t want to believe you exist! I won’tbelieve it!”
“But I am not fibbing, it’s all the truth; the truth is unhappily hardlyever amusing. I see you persist in expecting something big of me, andperhaps something fine. That’s a great pity, for I only give what I can—”
“Don’t talk philosophy, you ass!”
“Philosophy, indeed, when all my right side is numb and I am moaning andgroaning. I’ve tried all the medical faculty: they can diagnosebeautifully, they have the whole of your disease at their finger‐tips, butthey’ve no idea how to cure you. There was an enthusiastic little studenthere, ‘You may die,’ said he, ‘but you’ll know perfectly what disease youare dying of!’ And then what a way they have sending people tospecialists! ‘We only diagnose,’ they say, ‘but go to such‐and‐such aspecialist, he’ll cure you.’ The old doctor who used to cure all sorts ofdisease has completely disappeared, I assure you, now there are onlyspecialists and they all advertise in the newspapers. If anything is wrongwith your nose, they send you to Paris: there, they say, is a Europeanspecialist who cures noses. If you go to Paris, he’ll look at your nose; Ican only cure your right nostril, he’ll tell you, for I don’t cure theleft nostril, that’s not my speciality, but go to Vienna, there there’s aspecialist who will cure your left nostril. What are you to do? I fellback on popular remedies, a German doctor advised me to rub myself withhoney and salt in the bath‐house. Solely to get an extra bath I went,smeared myself all over and it did me no good at all. In despair I wroteto Count Mattei in Milan. He sent me a book and some drops, bless him,and, only fancy, Hoff’s malt extract cured me! I bought it by accident,drank a bottle and a half of it, and I was ready to dance, it took it awaycompletely. I made up my mind to write to the papers to thank him, I wasprompted by a feeling of gratitude, and only fancy, it led to no end of abother: not a single paper would take my letter. ‘It would be veryreactionary,’ they said, ‘no one will believe it. _Le diable n’existepoint._ You’d better remain anonymous,’ they advised me. What use is aletter of thanks if it’s anonymous? I laughed with the men at thenewspaper office; ‘It’s reactionary to believe in God in our days,’ Isaid, ‘but I am the devil, so I may be believed in.’ ‘We quite understandthat,’ they said. ‘Who doesn’t believe in the devil? Yet it won’t do, itmight injure our reputation. As a joke, if you like.’ But I thought as ajoke it wouldn’t be very witty. So it wasn’t printed. And do you know, Ihave felt sore about it to this day. My best feelings, gratitude, forinstance, are literally denied me simply from my social position.”
“Philosophical reflections again?” Ivan snarled malignantly.
“God preserve me from it, but one can’t help complaining sometimes. I am aslandered man. You upbraid me every moment with being stupid. One can seeyou are young. My dear fellow, intelligence isn’t the only thing! I havenaturally a kind and merry heart. ‘I also write vaudevilles of all sorts.’You seem to take me for Hlestakov grown old, but my fate is a far moreserious one. Before time was, by some decree which I could never make out,I was pre‐destined ‘to deny’ and yet I am genuinely good‐hearted and notat all inclined to negation. ‘No, you must go and deny, without denialthere’s no criticism and what would a journal be without a column ofcriticism?’ Without criticism it would be nothing but one ‘hosannah.’ Butnothing but hosannah is not enough for life, the hosannah must be tried inthe crucible of doubt and so on, in the same style. But I don’t meddle inthat, I didn’t create it, I am not answerable for it. Well, they’ve chosentheir scapegoat, they’ve made me write the column of criticism and so lifewas made possible. We understand that comedy; I, for instance, simply askfor annihilation. No, live, I am told, for there’d be nothing without you.If everything in the universe were sensible, nothing would happen. Therewould be no events without you, and there must be events. So against thegrain I serve to produce events and do what’s irrational because I amcommanded to. For all their indisputable intelligence, men take this farceas something serious, and that is their tragedy. They suffer, of course... but then they live, they live a real life, not a fantastic one, forsuffering is life. Without suffering what would be the pleasure of it? Itwould be transformed into an endless church service; it would be holy, buttedious. But what about me? I suffer, but still, I don’t live. I am x inan indeterminate equation. I am a sort of phantom in life who has lost allbeginning and end, and who has even forgotten his own name. You arelaughing— no, you are not laughing, you are angry again. You are for everangry, all you care about is intelligence, but I repeat again that I wouldgive away all this super‐stellar life, all the ranks and honors, simply tobe transformed into the soul of a merchant’s wife weighing eighteen stoneand set candles at God’s shrine.”
“Then even you don’t believe in God?” said Ivan, with a smile of hatred.
“What can I say?—that is, if you are in earnest—”
“Is there a God or not?” Ivan cried with the same savage intensity.
“Ah, then you are in earnest! My dear fellow, upon my word I don’t know.There! I’ve said it now!”
“You don’t know, but you see God? No, you are not some one apart, you aremyself, you are I and nothing more! You are rubbish, you are my fancy!”
“Well, if you like, I have the same philosophy as you, that would be true._Je pense, donc je suis_, I know that for a fact; all the rest, all theseworlds, God and even Satan—all that is not proved, to my mind. Does allthat exist of itself, or is it only an emanation of myself, a logicaldevelopment of my ego which alone has existed for ever: but I make hasteto stop, for I believe you will be jumping up to beat me directly.”
“You’d better tell me some anecdote!” said Ivan miserably.
“There is an anecdote precisely on our subject, or rather a legend, not ananecdote. You reproach me with unbelief, you see, you say, yet you don’tbelieve. But, my dear fellow, I am not the only one like that. We are allin a muddle over there now and all through your science. Once there usedto be atoms, five senses, four elements, and then everything hung togethersomehow. There were atoms in the ancient world even, but since we’velearned that you’ve discovered the chemical molecule and protoplasm andthe devil knows what, we had to lower our crest. There’s a regular muddle,and, above all, superstition, scandal; there’s as much scandal among us asamong you, you know; a little more in fact, and spying, indeed, for wehave our secret police department where private information is received.Well, this wild legend belongs to our middle ages—not yours, but ours—andno one believes it even among us, except the old ladies of eighteen stone,not your old ladies I mean, but ours. We’ve everything you have, I amrevealing one of our secrets out of friendship for you; though it’sforbidden. This legend is about Paradise. There was, they say, here onearth a thinker and philosopher. He rejected everything, ‘laws,conscience, faith,’ and, above all, the future life. He died; he expectedto go straight to darkness and death and he found a future life beforehim. He was astounded and indignant. ‘This is against my principles!’ hesaid. And he was punished for that ... that is, you must excuse me, I amjust repeating what I heard myself, it’s only a legend ... he wassentenced to walk a quadrillion kilometers in the dark (we’ve adopted themetric system, you know) and when he has finished that quadrillion, thegates of heaven would be opened to him and he’ll be forgiven—”
“And what tortures have you in the other world besides the quadrillionkilometers?” asked Ivan, with a strange eagerness.
“What tortures? Ah, don’t ask. In old days we had all sorts, but now theyhave taken chiefly to moral punishments—‘the stings of conscience’ and allthat nonsense. We got that, too, from you, from the softening of yourmanners. And who’s the better for it? Only those who have got noconscience, for how can they be tortured by conscience when they havenone? But decent people who have conscience and a sense of honor sufferfor it. Reforms, when the ground has not been prepared for them,especially if they are institutions copied from abroad, do nothing butmischief! The ancient fire was better. Well, this man, who was condemnedto the quadrillion kilometers, stood still, looked round and lay downacross the road. ‘I won’t go, I refuse on principle!’ Take the soul of anenlightened Russian atheist and mix it with the soul of the prophet Jonah,who sulked for three days and nights in the belly of the whale, and youget the character of that thinker who lay across the road.”
“What did he lie on there?”
“Well, I suppose there was something to lie on. You are not laughing?”
“Bravo!” cried Ivan, still with the same strange eagerness. Now he waslistening with an unexpected curiosity. “Well, is he lying there now?”
“That’s the point, that he isn’t. He lay there almost a thousand years andthen he got up and went on.”
“What an ass!” cried Ivan, laughing nervously and still seeming to bepondering something intently. “Does it make any difference whether he liesthere for ever or walks the quadrillion kilometers? It would take abillion years to walk it?”
“Much more than that. I haven’t got a pencil and paper or I could work itout. But he got there long ago, and that’s where the story begins.”
“What, he got there? But how did he get the billion years to do it?”
“Why, you keep thinking of our present earth! But our present earth mayhave been repeated a billion times. Why, it’s become extinct, been frozen;cracked, broken to bits, disintegrated into its elements, again ‘the waterabove the firmament,’ then again a comet, again a sun, again from the sunit becomes earth—and the same sequence may have been repeated endlesslyand exactly the same to every detail, most unseemly and insufferablytedious—”
“Well, well, what happened when he arrived?”
“Why, the moment the gates of Paradise were open and he walked in, beforehe had been there two seconds, by his watch (though to my thinking hiswatch must have long dissolved into its elements on the way), he cried outthat those two seconds were worth walking not a quadrillion kilometers buta quadrillion of quadrillions, raised to the quadrillionth power! In fact,he sang ‘hosannah’ and overdid it so, that some persons there of loftyideas wouldn’t shake hands with him at first—he’d become too rapidlyreactionary, they said. The Russian temperament. I repeat, it’s a legend.I give it for what it’s worth. So that’s the sort of ideas we have on suchsubjects even now.”
“I’ve caught you!” Ivan cried, with an almost childish delight, as thoughhe had succeeded in remembering something at last. “That anecdote aboutthe quadrillion years, I made up myself! I was seventeen then, I was atthe high school. I made up that anecdote and told it to a schoolfellowcalled Korovkin, it was at Moscow.... The anecdote is so characteristicthat I couldn’t have taken it from anywhere. I thought I’d forgotten it... but I’ve unconsciously recalled it—I recalled it myself—it was not youtelling it! Thousands of things are unconsciously remembered like thateven when people are being taken to execution ... it’s come back to me ina dream. You are that dream! You are a dream, not a living creature!”
“From the vehemence with which you deny my existence,” laughed thegentleman, “I am convinced that you believe in me.”
“Not in the slightest! I haven’t a hundredth part of a grain of faith inyou!”
“But you have the thousandth of a grain. Homeopathic doses perhaps are thestrongest. Confess that you have faith even to the ten‐thousandth of agrain.”
“Not for one minute,” cried Ivan furiously. “But I should like to believein you,” he added strangely.
“Aha! There’s an admission! But I am good‐natured. I’ll come to yourassistance again. Listen, it was I caught you, not you me. I told you youranecdote you’d forgotten, on purpose, so as to destroy your faith in mecompletely.”
“You are lying. The object of your visit is to convince me of yourexistence!”
“Just so. But hesitation, suspense, conflict between belief anddisbelief—is sometimes such torture to a conscientious man, such as youare, that it’s better to hang oneself at once. Knowing that you areinclined to believe in me, I administered some disbelief by telling youthat anecdote. I lead you to belief and disbelief by turns, and I have mymotive in it. It’s the new method. As soon as you disbelieve in mecompletely, you’ll begin assuring me to my face that I am not a dream buta reality. I know you. Then I shall have attained my object, which is anhonorable one. I shall sow in you only a tiny grain of faith and it willgrow into an oak‐tree—and such an oak‐tree that, sitting on it, you willlong to enter the ranks of ‘the hermits in the wilderness and the saintlywomen,’ for that is what you are secretly longing for. You’ll dine onlocusts, you’ll wander into the wilderness to save your soul!”
“Then it’s for the salvation of my soul you are working, is it, youscoundrel?”
“One must do a good work sometimes. How ill‐humored you are!”
“Fool! did you ever tempt those holy men who ate locusts and prayedseventeen years in the wilderness till they were overgrown with moss?”
“My dear fellow, I’ve done nothing else. One forgets the whole world andall the worlds, and sticks to one such saint, because he is a veryprecious diamond. One such soul, you know, is sometimes worth a wholeconstellation. We have our system of reckoning, you know. The conquest ispriceless! And some of them, on my word, are not inferior to you inculture, though you won’t believe it. They can contemplate such depths ofbelief and disbelief at the same moment that sometimes it really seemsthat they are within a hair’s‐breadth of being ‘turned upside down,’ asthe actor Gorbunov says.”
“Well, did you get your nose pulled?”
“My dear fellow,” observed the visitor sententiously, “it’s better to getoff with your nose pulled than without a nose at all. As an afflictedmarquis observed not long ago (he must have been treated by a specialist)in confession to his spiritual father—a Jesuit. I was present, it wassimply charming. ‘Give me back my nose!’ he said, and he beat his breast.‘My son,’ said the priest evasively, ‘all things are accomplished inaccordance with the inscrutable decrees of Providence, and what seems amisfortune sometimes leads to extraordinary, though unapparent, benefits.If stern destiny has deprived you of your nose, it’s to your advantagethat no one can ever pull you by your nose.’ ‘Holy father, that’s nocomfort,’ cried the despairing marquis. ‘I’d be delighted to have my nosepulled every day of my life, if it were only in its proper place.’ ‘Myson,’ sighs the priest, ‘you can’t expect every blessing at once. This ismurmuring against Providence, who even in this has not forgotten you, forif you repine as you repined just now, declaring you’d be glad to haveyour nose pulled for the rest of your life, your desire has already beenfulfilled indirectly, for when you lost your nose, you were led by thenose.’ ”
“Fool, how stupid!” cried Ivan.
“My dear friend, I only wanted to amuse you. But I swear that’s thegenuine Jesuit casuistry and I swear that it all happened word for word asI’ve told you. It happened lately and gave me a great deal of trouble. Theunhappy young man shot himself that very night when he got home. I was byhis side till the very last moment. Those Jesuit confessionals are reallymy most delightful diversion at melancholy moments. Here’s anotherincident that happened only the other day. A little blonde Norman girl oftwenty—a buxom, unsophisticated beauty that would make your mouthwater—comes to an old priest. She bends down and whispers her sin into thegrating. ‘Why, my daughter, have you fallen again already?’ cries thepriest. ‘O Sancta Maria, what do I hear! Not the same man this time, howlong is this going on? Aren’t you ashamed!’ ‘_Ah, mon père_,’ answers thesinner with tears of penitence, ‘_ça lui fait tant de plaisir, et à moi sipeu de peine!_’ Fancy, such an answer! I drew back. It was the cry ofnature, better than innocence itself, if you like. I absolved her sin onthe spot and was turning to go, but I was forced to turn back. I heard thepriest at the grating making an appointment with her for theevening—though he was an old man hard as flint, he fell in an instant! Itwas nature, the truth of nature asserted its rights! What, you are turningup your nose again? Angry again? I don’t know how to please you—”
“Leave me alone, you are beating on my brain like a haunting nightmare,”Ivan moaned miserably, helpless before his apparition. “I am bored withyou, agonizingly and insufferably. I would give anything to be able toshake you off!”
“I repeat, moderate your expectations, don’t demand of me ‘everythinggreat and noble’ and you’ll see how well we shall get on,” said thegentleman impressively. “You are really angry with me for not havingappeared to you in a red glow, with thunder and lightning, with scorchedwings, but have shown myself in such a modest form. You are wounded, inthe first place, in your esthetic feelings, and, secondly, in your pride.How could such a vulgar devil visit such a great man as you! Yes, there isthat romantic strain in you, that was so derided by Byelinsky. I can’thelp it, young man, as I got ready to come to you I did think as a joke ofappearing in the figure of a retired general who had served in theCaucasus, with a star of the Lion and the Sun on my coat. But I waspositively afraid of doing it, for you’d have thrashed me for daring topin the Lion and the Sun on my coat, instead of, at least, the Polar Staror the Sirius. And you keep on saying I am stupid, but, mercy on us! Imake no claim to be equal to you in intelligence. Mephistopheles declaredto Faust that he desired evil, but did only good. Well, he can say what helikes, it’s quite the opposite with me. I am perhaps the one man in allcreation who loves the truth and genuinely desires good. I was there whenthe Word, Who died on the Cross, rose up into heaven bearing on His bosomthe soul of the penitent thief. I heard the glad shrieks of the cherubimsinging and shouting hosannah and the thunderous rapture of the seraphimwhich shook heaven and all creation, and I swear to you by all that’ssacred, I longed to join the choir and shout hosannah with them all. Theword had almost escaped me, had almost broken from my lips ... you knowhow susceptible and esthetically impressionable I am. But common sense—oh,a most unhappy trait in my character—kept me in due bounds and I let themoment pass! For what would have happened, I reflected, what would havehappened after my hosannah? Everything on earth would have beenextinguished at once and no events could have occurred. And so, solelyfrom a sense of duty and my social position, I was forced to suppress thegood moment and to stick to my nasty task. Somebody takes all the creditof what’s good for Himself, and nothing but nastiness is left for me. ButI don’t envy the honor of a life of idle imposture, I am not ambitious.Why am I, of all creatures in the world, doomed to be cursed by all decentpeople and even to be kicked, for if I put on mortal form I am bound totake such consequences sometimes? I know, of course, there’s a secret init, but they won’t tell me the secret for anything, for then perhaps,seeing the meaning of it, I might bawl hosannah, and the indispensableminus would disappear at once, and good sense would reign supremethroughout the whole world. And that, of course, would mean the end ofeverything, even of magazines and newspapers, for who would take them in?I know that at the end of all things I shall be reconciled. I, too, shallwalk my quadrillion and learn the secret. But till that happens I amsulking and fulfill my destiny though it’s against the grain—that is, toruin thousands for the sake of saving one. How many souls have had to beruined and how many honorable reputations destroyed for the sake of thatone righteous man, Job, over whom they made such a fool of me in old days!Yes, till the secret is revealed, there are two sorts of truths forme—one, their truth, yonder, which I know nothing about so far, and theother my own. And there’s no knowing which will turn out the better....Are you asleep?”
“I might well be,” Ivan groaned angrily. “All my stupid ideas—outgrown,thrashed out long ago, and flung aside like a dead carcass—you present tome as something new!”
“There’s no pleasing you! And I thought I should fascinate you by myliterary style. That hosannah in the skies really wasn’t bad, was it? Andthen that ironical tone _à la_ Heine, eh?”
“No, I was never such a flunkey! How then could my soul beget a flunkeylike you?”
“My dear fellow, I know a most charming and attractive young Russiangentleman, a young thinker and a great lover of literature and art, theauthor of a promising poem entitled _The Grand Inquisitor_. I was onlythinking of him!”
“I forbid you to speak of _The Grand Inquisitor_,” cried Ivan, crimsonwith shame.
“And the _Geological Cataclysm_. Do you remember? That was a poem, now!”
“Hold your tongue, or I’ll kill you!”
“You’ll kill me? No, excuse me, I will speak. I came to treat myself tothat pleasure. Oh, I love the dreams of my ardent young friends, quiveringwith eagerness for life! ‘There are new men,’ you decided last spring,when you were meaning to come here, ‘they propose to destroy everythingand begin with cannibalism. Stupid fellows! they didn’t ask my advice! Imaintain that nothing need be destroyed, that we only need to destroy theidea of God in man, that’s how we have to set to work. It’s that, that wemust begin with. Oh, blind race of men who have no understanding! As soonas men have all of them denied God—and I believe that period, analogouswith geological periods, will come to pass—the old conception of theuniverse will fall of itself without cannibalism, and, what’s more, theold morality, and everything will begin anew. Men will unite to take fromlife all it can give, but only for joy and happiness in the present world.Man will be lifted up with a spirit of divine Titanic pride and the man‐god will appear. From hour to hour extending his conquest of natureinfinitely by his will and his science, man will feel such lofty joy fromhour to hour in doing it that it will make up for all his old dreams ofthe joys of heaven. Every one will know that he is mortal and will acceptdeath proudly and serenely like a god. His pride will teach him that it’suseless for him to repine at life’s being a moment, and he will love hisbrother without need of reward. Love will be sufficient only for a momentof life, but the very consciousness of its momentariness will intensifyits fire, which now is dissipated in dreams of eternal love beyond thegrave’... and so on and so on in the same style. Charming!”
Ivan sat with his eyes on the floor, and his hands pressed to his ears,but he began trembling all over. The voice continued.
“The question now is, my young thinker reflected, is it possible that sucha period will ever come? If it does, everything is determined and humanityis settled for ever. But as, owing to man’s inveterate stupidity, thiscannot come about for at least a thousand years, every one who recognizesthe truth even now may legitimately order his life as he pleases, on thenew principles. In that sense, ‘all things are lawful’ for him. What’smore, even if this period never comes to pass, since there is anyway noGod and no immortality, the new man may well become the man‐god, even ifhe is the only one in the whole world, and promoted to his new position,he may lightheartedly overstep all the barriers of the old morality of theold slave‐man, if necessary. There is no law for God. Where God stands,the place is holy. Where I stand will be at once the foremost place ...‘all things are lawful’ and that’s the end of it! That’s all verycharming; but if you want to swindle why do you want a moral sanction fordoing it? But that’s our modern Russian all over. He can’t bring himselfto swindle without a moral sanction. He is so in love with truth—”
The visitor talked, obviously carried away by his own eloquence, speakinglouder and louder and looking ironically at his host. But he did notsucceed in finishing; Ivan suddenly snatched a glass from the table andflung it at the orator.
“_Ah, mais c’est bête enfin_,” cried the latter, jumping up from the sofaand shaking the drops of tea off himself. “He remembers Luther’s inkstand!He takes me for a dream and throws glasses at a dream! It’s like a woman!I suspected you were only pretending to stop up your ears.”
A loud, persistent knocking was suddenly heard at the window. Ivan jumpedup from the sofa.
“Do you hear? You’d better open,” cried the visitor; “it’s your brotherAlyosha with the most interesting and surprising news, I’ll be bound!”
“Be silent, deceiver, I knew it was Alyosha, I felt he was coming, and ofcourse he has not come for nothing; of course he brings ‘news,’ ” Ivanexclaimed frantically.
“Open, open to him. There’s a snowstorm and he is your brother. _Monsieursait‐il le temps qu’il fait? C’est à ne pas mettre un chien dehors_.”
The knocking continued. Ivan wanted to rush to the window, but somethingseemed to fetter his arms and legs. He strained every effort to break hischains, but in vain. The knocking at the window grew louder and louder. Atlast the chains were broken and Ivan leapt up from the sofa. He lookedround him wildly. Both candles had almost burnt out, the glass he had justthrown at his visitor stood before him on the table, and there was no oneon the sofa opposite. The knocking on the window frame went onpersistently, but it was by no means so loud as it had seemed in hisdream; on the contrary, it was quite subdued.
“It was not a dream! No, I swear it was not a dream, it all happened justnow!” cried Ivan. He rushed to the window and opened the movable pane.
“Alyosha, I told you not to come,” he cried fiercely to his brother. “Intwo words, what do you want? In two words, do you hear?”
“An hour ago Smerdyakov hanged himself,” Alyosha answered from the yard.
“Come round to the steps, I’ll open at once,” said Ivan, going to open thedoor to Alyosha.


Chapter X. “It Was He Who Said That”

Alyosha coming in told Ivan that a little over an hour ago MaryaKondratyevna had run to his rooms and informed him Smerdyakov had takenhis own life. “I went in to clear away the samovar and he was hanging on anail in the wall.” On Alyosha’s inquiring whether she had informed thepolice, she answered that she had told no one, “but I flew straight toyou, I’ve run all the way.” She seemed perfectly crazy, Alyosha reported,and was shaking like a leaf. When Alyosha ran with her to the cottage, hefound Smerdyakov still hanging. On the table lay a note: “I destroy mylife of my own will and desire, so as to throw no blame on any one.”Alyosha left the note on the table and went straight to the police captainand told him all about it. “And from him I’ve come straight to you,” saidAlyosha, in conclusion, looking intently into Ivan’s face. He had nottaken his eyes off him while he told his story, as though struck bysomething in his expression.
“Brother,” he cried suddenly, “you must be terribly ill. You look anddon’t seem to understand what I tell you.”
“It’s a good thing you came,” said Ivan, as though brooding, and nothearing Alyosha’s exclamation. “I knew he had hanged himself.”
“From whom?”
“I don’t know. But I knew. Did I know? Yes, he told me. He told me so justnow.”
Ivan stood in the middle of the room, and still spoke in the same broodingtone, looking at the ground.
“Who is _he_?” asked Alyosha, involuntarily looking round.
“He’s slipped away.”
Ivan raised his head and smiled softly.
“He was afraid of you, of a dove like you. You are a ‘pure cherub.’ Dmitricalls you a cherub. Cherub!... the thunderous rapture of the seraphim.What are seraphim? Perhaps a whole constellation. But perhaps thatconstellation is only a chemical molecule. There’s a constellation of theLion and the Sun. Don’t you know it?”
“Brother, sit down,” said Alyosha in alarm. “For goodness’ sake, sit downon the sofa! You are delirious; put your head on the pillow, that’s right.Would you like a wet towel on your head? Perhaps it will do you good.”
“Give me the towel: it’s here on the chair. I just threw it down there.”
“It’s not here. Don’t worry yourself. I know where it is—here,” saidAlyosha, finding a clean towel, folded up and unused, by Ivan’s dressing‐table in the other corner of the room. Ivan looked strangely at the towel:recollection seemed to come back to him for an instant.
“Stay”—he got up from the sofa—“an hour ago I took that new towel fromthere and wetted it. I wrapped it round my head and threw it down here ...How is it it’s dry? There was no other.”
“You put that towel on your head?” asked Alyosha.
“Yes, and walked up and down the room an hour ago ... Why have the candlesburnt down so? What’s the time?”
“Nearly twelve.”
“No, no, no!” Ivan cried suddenly. “It was not a dream. He was here; hewas sitting here, on that sofa. When you knocked at the window, I threw aglass at him ... this one. Wait a minute. I was asleep last time, but thisdream was not a dream. It has happened before. I have dreams now, Alyosha... yet they are not dreams, but reality. I walk about, talk and see ...though I am asleep. But he was sitting here, on that sofa there.... He isfrightfully stupid, Alyosha, frightfully stupid.” Ivan laughed suddenlyand began pacing about the room.
“Who is stupid? Of whom are you talking, brother?” Alyosha asked anxiouslyagain.
“The devil! He’s taken to visiting me. He’s been here twice, almost threetimes. He taunted me with being angry at his being a simple devil and notSatan, with scorched wings, in thunder and lightning. But he is not Satan:that’s a lie. He is an impostor. He is simply a devil—a paltry, trivialdevil. He goes to the baths. If you undressed him, you’d be sure to findhe had a tail, long and smooth like a Danish dog’s, a yard long, duncolor.... Alyosha, you are cold. You’ve been in the snow. Would you likesome tea? What? Is it cold? Shall I tell her to bring some? _C’est à nepas mettre un chien dehors._...”
Alyosha ran to the washing‐stand, wetted the towel, persuaded Ivan to sitdown again, and put the wet towel round his head. He sat down beside him.
“What were you telling me just now about Lise?” Ivan began again. (He wasbecoming very talkative.) “I like Lise. I said something nasty about her.It was a lie. I like her ... I am afraid for Katya to‐morrow. I am moreafraid of her than of anything. On account of the future. She will cast meoff to‐morrow and trample me under foot. She thinks that I am ruiningMitya from jealousy on her account! Yes, she thinks that! But it’s not so.To‐morrow the cross, but not the gallows. No, I shan’t hang myself. Do youknow, I can never commit suicide, Alyosha. Is it because I am base? I amnot a coward. Is it from love of life? How did I know that Smerdyakov hadhanged himself? Yes, it was _he_ told me so.”
“And you are quite convinced that there has been some one here?” askedAlyosha.
“Yes, on that sofa in the corner. You would have driven him away. You diddrive him away: he disappeared when you arrived. I love your face,Alyosha. Did you know that I loved your face? And _he_ is myself, Alyosha.All that’s base in me, all that’s mean and contemptible. Yes, I am aromantic. He guessed it ... though it’s a libel. He is frightfully stupid;but it’s to his advantage. He has cunning, animal cunning—he knew how toinfuriate me. He kept taunting me with believing in him, and that was howhe made me listen to him. He fooled me like a boy. He told me a great dealthat was true about myself, though. I should never have owned it tomyself. Do you know, Alyosha,” Ivan added in an intensely earnest andconfidential tone, “I should be awfully glad to think that it was _he_ andnot I.”
“He has worn you out,” said Alyosha, looking compassionately at hisbrother.
“He’s been teasing me. And you know he does it so cleverly, so cleverly.‘Conscience! What is conscience? I make it up for myself. Why am Itormented by it? From habit. From the universal habit of mankind for theseven thousand years. So let us give it up, and we shall be gods.’ It washe said that, it was he said that!”
“And not you, not you?” Alyosha could not help crying, looking frankly athis brother. “Never mind him, anyway; have done with him and forget him.And let him take with him all that you curse now, and never come back!”
“Yes, but he is spiteful. He laughed at me. He was impudent, Alyosha,”Ivan said, with a shudder of offense. “But he was unfair to me, unfair tome about lots of things. He told lies about me to my face. ‘Oh, you aregoing to perform an act of heroic virtue: to confess you murdered yourfather, that the valet murdered him at your instigation.’ ”
“Brother,” Alyosha interposed, “restrain yourself. It was not you murderedhim. It’s not true!”
“That’s what he says, he, and he knows it. ‘You are going to perform anact of heroic virtue, and you don’t believe in virtue; that’s whattortures you and makes you angry, that’s why you are so vindictive.’ Hesaid that to me about me and he knows what he says.”
“It’s you say that, not he,” exclaimed Alyosha mournfully, “and you say itbecause you are ill and delirious, tormenting yourself.”
“No, he knows what he says. ‘You are going from pride,’ he says. ‘You’llstand up and say it was I killed him, and why do you writhe with horror?You are lying! I despise your opinion, I despise your horror!’ He saidthat about me. ‘And do you know you are longing for their praise—“he is acriminal, a murderer, but what a generous soul; he wanted to save hisbrother and he confessed.” ’ That’s a lie, Alyosha!” Ivan cried suddenly,with flashing eyes. “I don’t want the low rabble to praise me, I swear Idon’t! That’s a lie! That’s why I threw the glass at him and it brokeagainst his ugly face.”
“Brother, calm yourself, stop!” Alyosha entreated him.
“Yes, he knows how to torment one. He’s cruel,” Ivan went on, unheeding.“I had an inkling from the first what he came for. ‘Granting that you gothrough pride, still you had a hope that Smerdyakov might be convicted andsent to Siberia, and Mitya would be acquitted, while you would only bepunished with moral condemnation’ (‘Do you hear?’ he laughed then)—‘andsome people will praise you. But now Smerdyakov’s dead, he has hangedhimself, and who’ll believe you alone? But yet you are going, you aregoing, you’ll go all the same, you’ve decided to go. What are you goingfor now?’ That’s awful, Alyosha. I can’t endure such questions. Who dareask me such questions?”
“Brother,” interposed Alyosha—his heart sank with terror, but he stillseemed to hope to bring Ivan to reason—“how could he have told you ofSmerdyakov’s death before I came, when no one knew of it and there was notime for any one to know of it?”
“He told me,” said Ivan firmly, refusing to admit a doubt. “It was all hedid talk about, if you come to that. ‘And it would be all right if youbelieved in virtue,’ he said. ‘No matter if they disbelieve you, you aregoing for the sake of principle. But you are a little pig like FyodorPavlovitch, and what do you want with virtue? Why do you want to gomeddling if your sacrifice is of no use to any one? Because you don’t knowyourself why you go! Oh, you’d give a great deal to know yourself why yougo! And can you have made up your mind? You’ve not made up your mind.You’ll sit all night deliberating whether to go or not. But you will go;you know you’ll go. You know that whichever way you decide, the decisiondoes not depend on you. You’ll go because you won’t dare not to go. Whywon’t you dare? You must guess that for yourself. That’s a riddle foryou!’ He got up and went away. You came and he went. He called me acoward, Alyosha! _Le mot de l’énigme_ is that I am a coward. ‘It is notfor such eagles to soar above the earth.’ It was he added that—he! AndSmerdyakov said the same. He must be killed! Katya despises me. I’ve seenthat for a month past. Even Lise will begin to despise me! ‘You are goingin order to be praised.’ That’s a brutal lie! And you despise me too,Alyosha. Now I am going to hate you again! And I hate the monster, too! Ihate the monster! I don’t want to save the monster. Let him rot inSiberia! He’s begun singing a hymn! Oh, to‐morrow I’ll go, stand beforethem, and spit in their faces!”
He jumped up in a frenzy, flung off the towel, and fell to pacing up anddown the room again. Alyosha recalled what he had just said. “I seem to besleeping awake.... I walk, I speak, I see, but I am asleep.” It seemed tobe just like that now. Alyosha did not leave him. The thought passedthrough his mind to run for a doctor, but he was afraid to leave hisbrother alone: there was no one to whom he could leave him. By degreesIvan lost consciousness completely at last. He still went on talking,talking incessantly, but quite incoherently, and even articulated hiswords with difficulty. Suddenly he staggered violently; but Alyosha was intime to support him. Ivan let him lead him to his bed. Alyosha undressedhim somehow and put him to bed. He sat watching over him for another twohours. The sick man slept soundly, without stirring, breathing softly andevenly. Alyosha took a pillow and lay down on the sofa, withoutundressing.
As he fell asleep he prayed for Mitya and Ivan. He began to understandIvan’s illness. “The anguish of a proud determination. An earnestconscience!” God, in Whom he disbelieved, and His truth were gainingmastery over his heart, which still refused to submit. “Yes,” the thoughtfloated through Alyosha’s head as it lay on the pillow, “yes, ifSmerdyakov is dead, no one will believe Ivan’s evidence; but he will goand give it.” Alyosha smiled softly. “God will conquer!” he thought. “Hewill either rise up in the light of truth, or ... he’ll perish in hate,revenging on himself and on every one his having served the cause he doesnot believe in,” Alyosha added bitterly, and again he prayed for Ivan.



Book XII. A Judicial Error


Chapter I. The Fatal Day

At ten o’clock in the morning of the day following the events I havedescribed, the trial of Dmitri Karamazov began in our district court.
I hasten to emphasize the fact that I am far from esteeming myself capableof reporting all that took place at the trial in full detail, or even inthe actual order of events. I imagine that to mention everything with fullexplanation would fill a volume, even a very large one. And so I trust Imay not be reproached, for confining myself to what struck me. I may haveselected as of most interest what was of secondary importance, and mayhave omitted the most prominent and essential details. But I see I shalldo better not to apologize. I will do my best and the reader will see forhimself that I have done all I can.
And, to begin with, before entering the court, I will mention whatsurprised me most on that day. Indeed, as it appeared later, every one wassurprised at it, too. We all knew that the affair had aroused greatinterest, that every one was burning with impatience for the trial tobegin, that it had been a subject of talk, conjecture, exclamation andsurmise for the last two months in local society. Every one knew, too,that the case had become known throughout Russia, but yet we had notimagined that it had aroused such burning, such intense, interest in everyone, not only among ourselves, but all over Russia. This became evident atthe trial this day.
Visitors had arrived not only from the chief town of our province, butfrom several other Russian towns, as well as from Moscow and Petersburg.Among them were lawyers, ladies, and even several distinguishedpersonages. Every ticket of admission had been snatched up. A specialplace behind the table at which the three judges sat was set apart for themost distinguished and important of the men visitors; a row of arm‐chairshad been placed there—something exceptional, which had never been allowedbefore. A large proportion—not less than half of the public—were ladies.There was such a large number of lawyers from all parts that they did notknow where to seat them, for every ticket had long since been eagerlysought for and distributed. I saw at the end of the room, behind theplatform, a special partition hurriedly put up, behind which all theselawyers were admitted, and they thought themselves lucky to have standingroom there, for all chairs had been removed for the sake of space, and thecrowd behind the partition stood throughout the case closely packed,shoulder to shoulder.
Some of the ladies, especially those who came from a distance, made theirappearance in the gallery very smartly dressed, but the majority of theladies were oblivious even of dress. Their faces betrayed hysterical,intense, almost morbid, curiosity. A peculiar fact—established afterwardsby many observations—was that almost all the ladies, or, at least the vastmajority of them, were on Mitya’s side and in favor of his beingacquitted. This was perhaps chiefly owing to his reputation as a conquerorof female hearts. It was known that two women rivals were to appear in thecase. One of them—Katerina Ivanovna—was an object of general interest. Allsorts of extraordinary tales were told about her, amazing anecdotes of herpassion for Mitya, in spite of his crime. Her pride and “aristocraticconnections” were particularly insisted upon (she had called upon scarcelyany one in the town). People said she intended to petition the Governmentfor leave to accompany the criminal to Siberia and to be married to himsomewhere in the mines. The appearance of Grushenka in court was awaitedwith no less impatience. The public was looking forward with anxiouscuriosity to the meeting of the two rivals—the proud aristocratic girl and“the hetaira.” But Grushenka was a more familiar figure to the ladies ofthe district than Katerina Ivanovna. They had already seen “the woman whohad ruined Fyodor Pavlovitch and his unhappy son,” and all, almost withoutexception, wondered how father and son could be so in love with “such avery common, ordinary Russian girl, who was not even pretty.”
In brief, there was a great deal of talk. I know for a fact that therewere several serious family quarrels on Mitya’s account in our town. Manyladies quarreled violently with their husbands over differences of opinionabout the dreadful case, and it was only natural that the husbands ofthese ladies, far from being favorably disposed to the prisoner, shouldenter the court bitterly prejudiced against him. In fact, one may saypretty certainly that the masculine, as distinguished from the feminine,part of the audience were biased against the prisoner. There were numbersof severe, frowning, even vindictive faces. Mitya, indeed, had managed tooffend many people during his stay in the town. Some of the visitors were,of course, in excellent spirits and quite unconcerned as to the fate ofMitya personally. But all were interested in the trial, and the majorityof the men were certainly hoping for the conviction of the criminal,except perhaps the lawyers, who were more interested in the legal than inthe moral aspect of the case.
Everybody was excited at the presence of the celebrated lawyer,Fetyukovitch. His talent was well known, and this was not the first timehe had defended notorious criminal cases in the provinces. And if hedefended them, such cases became celebrated and long remembered all overRussia. There were stories, too, about our prosecutor and about thePresident of the Court. It was said that Ippolit Kirillovitch was in atremor at meeting Fetyukovitch, and that they had been enemies from thebeginning of their careers in Petersburg, that though our sensitiveprosecutor, who always considered that he had been aggrieved by some onein Petersburg because his talents had not been properly appreciated, waskeenly excited over the Karamazov case, and was even dreaming ofrebuilding his flagging fortunes by means of it, Fetyukovitch, they said,was his one anxiety. But these rumors were not quite just. Our prosecutorwas not one of those men who lose heart in face of danger. On thecontrary, his self‐confidence increased with the increase of danger. Itmust be noted that our prosecutor was in general too hasty and morbidlyimpressionable. He would put his whole soul into some case and work at itas though his whole fate and his whole fortune depended on its result.This was the subject of some ridicule in the legal world, for just by thischaracteristic our prosecutor had gained a wider notoriety than could havebeen expected from his modest position. People laughed particularly at hispassion for psychology. In my opinion, they were wrong, and our prosecutorwas, I believe, a character of greater depth than was generally supposed.But with his delicate health he had failed to make his mark at the outsetof his career and had never made up for it later.
As for the President of our Court, I can only say that he was a humane andcultured man, who had a practical knowledge of his work and progressiveviews. He was rather ambitious, but did not concern himself greatly abouthis future career. The great aim of his life was to be a man of advancedideas. He was, too, a man of connections and property. He felt, as welearnt afterwards, rather strongly about the Karamazov case, but from asocial, not from a personal standpoint. He was interested in it as asocial phenomenon, in its classification and its character as a product ofour social conditions, as typical of the national character, and so on,and so on. His attitude to the personal aspect of the case, to its tragicsignificance and the persons involved in it, including the prisoner, wasrather indifferent and abstract, as was perhaps fitting, indeed.
The court was packed and overflowing long before the judges made theirappearance. Our court is the best hall in the town—spacious, lofty, andgood for sound. On the right of the judges, who were on a raised platform,a table and two rows of chairs had been put ready for the jury. On theleft was the place for the prisoner and the counsel for the defense. Inthe middle of the court, near the judges, was a table with the “materialproofs.” On it lay Fyodor Pavlovitch’s white silk dressing‐gown, stainedwith blood; the fatal brass pestle with which the supposed murder had beencommitted; Mitya’s shirt, with a blood‐stained sleeve; his coat, stainedwith blood in patches over the pocket in which he had put hishandkerchief; the handkerchief itself, stiff with blood and by now quiteyellow; the pistol loaded by Mitya at Perhotin’s with a view to suicide,and taken from him on the sly at Mokroe by Trifon Borissovitch; theenvelope in which the three thousand roubles had been put ready forGrushenka, the narrow pink ribbon with which it had been tied, and manyother articles I don’t remember. In the body of the hall, at somedistance, came the seats for the public. But in front of the balustrade afew chairs had been placed for witnesses who remained in the court aftergiving their evidence.
At ten o’clock the three judges arrived—the President, one honoraryjustice of the peace, and one other. The prosecutor, of course, enteredimmediately after. The President was a short, stout, thick‐set man offifty, with a dyspeptic complexion, dark hair turning gray and cut short,and a red ribbon, of what Order I don’t remember. The prosecutor struck meand the others, too, as looking particularly pale, almost green. His faceseemed to have grown suddenly thinner, perhaps in a single night, for Ihad seen him looking as usual only two days before. The President beganwith asking the court whether all the jury were present.
But I see I can’t go on like this, partly because some things I did nothear, others I did not notice, and others I have forgotten, but most ofall because, as I have said before, I have literally no time or space tomention everything that was said and done. I only know that neither sideobjected to very many of the jurymen. I remember the twelve jurymen—fourwere petty officials of the town, two were merchants, and six peasants andartisans of the town. I remember, long before the trial, questions werecontinually asked with some surprise, especially by ladies: “Can such adelicate, complex and psychological case be submitted for decision topetty officials and even peasants?” and “What can an official, still morea peasant, understand in such an affair?” All the four officials in thejury were, in fact, men of no consequence and of low rank. Except one whowas rather younger, they were gray‐headed men, little known in society,who had vegetated on a pitiful salary, and who probably had elderly,unpresentable wives and crowds of children, perhaps even without shoes andstockings. At most, they spent their leisure over cards and, of course,had never read a single book. The two merchants looked respectable, butwere strangely silent and stolid. One of them was close‐shaven, and wasdressed in European style; the other had a small, gray beard, and wore ared ribbon with some sort of a medal upon it on his neck. There is no needto speak of the artisans and the peasants. The artisans ofSkotoprigonyevsk are almost peasants, and even work on the land. Two ofthem also wore European dress, and, perhaps for that reason, were dirtierand more uninviting‐looking than the others. So that one might wellwonder, as I did as soon as I had looked at them, “what men like thatcould possibly make of such a case?” Yet their faces made a strangelyimposing, almost menacing, impression; they were stern and frowning.
At last the President opened the case of the murder of Fyodor PavlovitchKaramazov. I don’t quite remember how he described him. The court usherwas told to bring in the prisoner, and Mitya made his appearance. Therewas a hush through the court. One could have heard a fly. I don’t know howit was with others, but Mitya made a most unfavorable impression on me. Helooked an awful dandy in a brand‐new frock‐coat. I heard afterwards thathe had ordered it in Moscow expressly for the occasion from his owntailor, who had his measure. He wore immaculate black kid gloves andexquisite linen. He walked in with his yard‐long strides, looking stifflystraight in front of him, and sat down in his place with a mostunperturbed air.
At the same moment the counsel for defense, the celebrated Fetyukovitch,entered, and a sort of subdued hum passed through the court. He was atall, spare man, with long thin legs, with extremely long, thin, palefingers, clean‐shaven face, demurely brushed, rather short hair, and thinlips that were at times curved into something between a sneer and a smile.He looked about forty. His face would have been pleasant, if it had notbeen for his eyes, which, in themselves small and inexpressive, were setremarkably close together, with only the thin, long nose as a dividingline between them. In fact, there was something strikingly birdlike abouthis face. He was in evening dress and white tie.
I remember the President’s first questions to Mitya, about his name, hiscalling, and so on. Mitya answered sharply, and his voice was sounexpectedly loud that it made the President start and look at theprisoner with surprise. Then followed a list of persons who were to takepart in the proceedings—that is, of the witnesses and experts. It was along list. Four of the witnesses were not present—Miüsov, who had givenevidence at the preliminary inquiry, but was now in Paris; Madame Hohlakovand Maximov, who were absent through illness; and Smerdyakov, through hissudden death, of which an official statement from the police waspresented. The news of Smerdyakov’s death produced a sudden stir andwhisper in the court. Many of the audience, of course, had not heard ofthe sudden suicide. What struck people most was Mitya’s sudden outburst Assoon as the statement of Smerdyakov’s death was made, he cried out aloudfrom his place:
“He was a dog and died like a dog!”
I remember how his counsel rushed to him, and how the President addressedhim, threatening to take stern measures, if such an irregularity wererepeated. Mitya nodded and in a subdued voice repeated several timesabruptly to his counsel, with no show of regret:
“I won’t again, I won’t. It escaped me. I won’t do it again.”
And, of course, this brief episode did him no good with the jury or thepublic. His character was displayed, and it spoke for itself. It was underthe influence of this incident that the opening statement was read. It wasrather short, but circumstantial. It only stated the chief reasons why hehad been arrested, why he must be tried, and so on. Yet it made a greatimpression on me. The clerk read it loudly and distinctly. The wholetragedy was suddenly unfolded before us, concentrated, in bold relief, ina fatal and pitiless light. I remember how, immediately after it had beenread, the President asked Mitya in a loud impressive voice:
“Prisoner, do you plead guilty?”
Mitya suddenly rose from his seat.
“I plead guilty to drunkenness and dissipation,” he exclaimed, again in astartling, almost frenzied, voice, “to idleness and debauchery. I meant tobecome an honest man for good, just at the moment when I was struck downby fate. But I am not guilty of the death of that old man, my enemy and myfather. No, no, I am not guilty of robbing him! I could not be. DmitriKaramazov is a scoundrel, but not a thief.”
He sat down again, visibly trembling all over. The President againbriefly, but impressively, admonished him to answer only what was asked,and not to go off into irrelevant exclamations. Then he ordered the caseto proceed. All the witnesses were led up to take the oath. Then I sawthem all together. The brothers of the prisoner were, however, allowed togive evidence without taking the oath. After an exhortation from thepriest and the President, the witnesses were led away and were made to sitas far as possible apart from one another. Then they began calling them upone by one.


Chapter II. Dangerous Witnesses

I do not know whether the witnesses for the defense and for theprosecution were separated into groups by the President, and whether itwas arranged to call them in a certain order. But no doubt it was so. Ionly know that the witnesses for the prosecution were called first. Irepeat I don’t intend to describe all the questions step by step. Besides,my account would be to some extent superfluous, because in the speechesfor the prosecution and for the defense the whole course of the evidencewas brought together and set in a strong and significant light, and I tookdown parts of those two remarkable speeches in full, and will quote themin due course, together with one extraordinary and quite unexpectedepisode, which occurred before the final speeches, and undoubtedlyinfluenced the sinister and fatal outcome of the trial.
I will only observe that from the first moments of the trial one peculiarcharacteristic of the case was conspicuous and observed by all, that is,the overwhelming strength of the prosecution as compared with thearguments the defense had to rely upon. Every one realized it from thefirst moment that the facts began to group themselves round a singlepoint, and the whole horrible and bloody crime was gradually revealed.Every one, perhaps, felt from the first that the case was beyond dispute,that there was no doubt about it, that there could be really nodiscussion, and that the defense was only a matter of form, and that theprisoner was guilty, obviously and conclusively guilty. I imagine thateven the ladies, who were so impatiently longing for the acquittal of theinteresting prisoner, were at the same time, without exception, convincedof his guilt. What’s more, I believe they would have been mortified if hisguilt had not been so firmly established, as that would have lessened theeffect of the closing scene of the criminal’s acquittal. That he would beacquitted, all the ladies, strange to say, were firmly persuaded up to thevery last moment. “He is guilty, but he will be acquitted, from motives ofhumanity, in accordance with the new ideas, the new sentiments that hadcome into fashion,” and so on, and so on. And that was why they hadcrowded into the court so impatiently. The men were more interested in thecontest between the prosecutor and the famous Fetyukovitch. All werewondering and asking themselves what could even a talent likeFetyukovitch’s make of such a desperate case; and so they followed hisachievements, step by step, with concentrated attention.
But Fetyukovitch remained an enigma to all up to the very end, up to hisspeech. Persons of experience suspected that he had some design, that hewas working towards some object, but it was almost impossible to guesswhat it was. His confidence and self‐reliance were unmistakable, however.Every one noticed with pleasure, moreover, that he, after so short a stay,not more than three days, perhaps, among us, had so wonderfully succeededin mastering the case and “had studied it to a nicety.” People describedwith relish, afterwards, how cleverly he had “taken down” all thewitnesses for the prosecution, and as far as possible perplexed them and,what’s more, had aspersed their reputation and so depreciated the value oftheir evidence. But it was supposed that he did this rather by way ofsport, so to speak, for professional glory, to show nothing had beenomitted of the accepted methods, for all were convinced that he could dono real good by such disparagement of the witnesses, and probably was moreaware of this than any one, having some idea of his own in the background,some concealed weapon of defense, which he would suddenly reveal when thetime came. But meanwhile, conscious of his strength, he seemed to bediverting himself.
So, for instance, when Grigory, Fyodor Pavlovitch’s old servant, who hadgiven the most damning piece of evidence about the open door, wasexamined, the counsel for the defense positively fastened upon him whenhis turn came to question him. It must be noted that Grigory entered thehall with a composed and almost stately air, not the least disconcerted bythe majesty of the court or the vast audience listening to him. He gaveevidence with as much confidence as though he had been talking with hisMarfa, only perhaps more respectfully. It was impossible to make himcontradict himself. The prosecutor questioned him first in detail aboutthe family life of the Karamazovs. The family picture stood out in luridcolors. It was plain to ear and eye that the witness was guileless andimpartial. In spite of his profound reverence for the memory of hisdeceased master, he yet bore witness that he had been unjust to Mitya and“hadn’t brought up his children as he should. He’d have been devoured bylice when he was little, if it hadn’t been for me,” he added, describingMitya’s early childhood. “It wasn’t fair either of the father to wrong hisson over his mother’s property, which was by right his.”
In reply to the prosecutor’s question what grounds he had for assertingthat Fyodor Pavlovitch had wronged his son in their money relations,Grigory, to the surprise of every one, had no proof at all to bringforward, but he still persisted that the arrangement with the son was“unfair,” and that he ought “to have paid him several thousand roublesmore.” I must note, by the way, that the prosecutor asked this questionwhether Fyodor Pavlovitch had really kept back part of Mitya’s inheritancewith marked persistence of all the witnesses who could be asked it, notexcepting Alyosha and Ivan, but he obtained no exact information from anyone; all alleged that it was so, but were unable to bring forward anydistinct proof. Grigory’s description of the scene at the dinner‐table,when Dmitri had burst in and beaten his father, threatening to come backto kill him, made a sinister impression on the court, especially as theold servant’s composure in telling it, his parsimony of words and peculiarphraseology, were as effective as eloquence. He observed that he was notangry with Mitya for having knocked him down and struck him on the face;he had forgiven him long ago, he said. Of the deceased Smerdyakov heobserved, crossing himself, that he was a lad of ability, but stupid andafflicted, and, worse still, an infidel, and that it was Fyodor Pavlovitchand his elder son who had taught him to be so. But he defendedSmerdyakov’s honesty almost with warmth, and related how Smerdyakov hadonce found the master’s money in the yard, and, instead of concealing it,had taken it to his master, who had rewarded him with a “gold piece” forit, and trusted him implicitly from that time forward. He maintainedobstinately that the door into the garden had been open. But he was askedso many questions that I can’t recall them all.
At last the counsel for the defense began to cross‐examine him, and thefirst question he asked was about the envelope in which Fyodor Pavlovitchwas supposed to have put three thousand roubles for “a certain person.”“Have you ever seen it, you, who were for so many years in closeattendance on your master?” Grigory answered that he had not seen it andhad never heard of the money from any one “till everybody was talkingabout it.” This question about the envelope Fetyukovitch put to every onewho could conceivably have known of it, as persistently as the prosecutorasked his question about Dmitri’s inheritance, and got the same answerfrom all, that no one had seen the envelope, though many had heard of it.From the beginning every one noticed Fetyukovitch’s persistence on thissubject.
“Now, with your permission I’ll ask you a question,” Fetyukovitch said,suddenly and unexpectedly. “Of what was that balsam, or, rather,decoction, made, which, as we learn from the preliminary inquiry, you usedon that evening to rub your lumbago, in the hope of curing it?”
Grigory looked blankly at the questioner, and after a brief silencemuttered, “There was saffron in it.”
“Nothing but saffron? Don’t you remember any other ingredient?”
“There was milfoil in it, too.”
“And pepper perhaps?” Fetyukovitch queried.
“Yes, there was pepper, too.”
“Etcetera. And all dissolved in vodka?”
“In spirit.”
There was a faint sound of laughter in the court.
“You see, in spirit. After rubbing your back, I believe, you drank whatwas left in the bottle with a certain pious prayer, only known to yourwife?”
“I did.”
“Did you drink much? Roughly speaking, a wine‐glass or two?”
“It might have been a tumbler‐full.”
“A tumbler‐full, even. Perhaps a tumbler and a half?”
Grigory did not answer. He seemed to see what was meant.
“A glass and a half of neat spirit—is not at all bad, don’t you think? Youmight see the gates of heaven open, not only the door into the garden?”
Grigory remained silent. There was another laugh in the court. ThePresident made a movement.
“Do you know for a fact,” Fetyukovitch persisted, “whether you were awakeor not when you saw the open door?”
“I was on my legs.”
“That’s not a proof that you were awake.” (There was again laughter in thecourt.) “Could you have answered at that moment, if any one had asked youa question—for instance, what year it is?”
“I don’t know.”
“And what year is it, Anno Domini, do you know?”
Grigory stood with a perplexed face, looking straight at his tormentor.Strange to say, it appeared he really did not know what year it was.
“But perhaps you can tell me how many fingers you have on your hands?”
“I am a servant,” Grigory said suddenly, in a loud and distinct voice. “Ifmy betters think fit to make game of me, it is my duty to suffer it.”
Fetyukovitch was a little taken aback, and the President intervened,reminding him that he must ask more relevant questions. Fetyukovitch bowedwith dignity and said that he had no more questions to ask of the witness.The public and the jury, of course, were left with a grain of doubt intheir minds as to the evidence of a man who might, while undergoing acertain cure, have seen “the gates of heaven,” and who did not even knowwhat year he was living in. But before Grigory left the box anotherepisode occurred. The President, turning to the prisoner, asked himwhether he had any comment to make on the evidence of the last witness.
“Except about the door, all he has said is true,” cried Mitya, in a loudvoice. “For combing the lice off me, I thank him; for forgiving my blows,I thank him. The old man has been honest all his life and as faithful tomy father as seven hundred poodles.”
“Prisoner, be careful in your language,” the President admonished him.
“I am not a poodle,” Grigory muttered.
“All right, it’s I am a poodle myself,” cried Mitya. “If it’s an insult, Itake it to myself and I beg his pardon. I was a beast and cruel to him. Iwas cruel to Æsop too.”
“What Æsop?” the President asked sternly again.
“Oh, Pierrot ... my father, Fyodor Pavlovitch.”
The President again and again warned Mitya impressively and very sternlyto be more careful in his language.
“You are injuring yourself in the opinion of your judges.”
The counsel for the defense was equally clever in dealing with theevidence of Rakitin. I may remark that Rakitin was one of the leadingwitnesses and one to whom the prosecutor attached great significance. Itappeared that he knew everything; his knowledge was amazing, he had beeneverywhere, seen everything, talked to everybody, knew every detail of thebiography of Fyodor Pavlovitch and all the Karamazovs. Of the envelope, itis true, he had only heard from Mitya himself. But he described minutelyMitya’s exploits in the “Metropolis,” all his compromising doings andsayings, and told the story of Captain Snegiryov’s “wisp of tow.” But evenRakitin could say nothing positive about Mitya’s inheritance, and confinedhimself to contemptuous generalities.
“Who could tell which of them was to blame, and which was in debt to theother, with their crazy Karamazov way of muddling things so that no onecould make head or tail of it?” He attributed the tragic crime to thehabits that had become ingrained by ages of serfdom and the distressedcondition of Russia, due to the lack of appropriate institutions. He was,in fact, allowed some latitude of speech. This was the first occasion onwhich Rakitin showed what he could do, and attracted notice. Theprosecutor knew that the witness was preparing a magazine article on thecase, and afterwards in his speech, as we shall see later, quoted someideas from the article, showing that he had seen it already. The picturedrawn by the witness was a gloomy and sinister one, and greatlystrengthened the case for the prosecution. Altogether, Rakitin’s discoursefascinated the public by its independence and the extraordinary nobilityof its ideas. There were even two or three outbreaks of applause when hespoke of serfdom and the distressed condition of Russia.
But Rakitin, in his youthful ardor, made a slight blunder, of which thecounsel for the defense at once adroitly took advantage. Answering certainquestions about Grushenka, and carried away by the loftiness of his ownsentiments and his success, of which he was, of course, conscious, he wentso far as to speak somewhat contemptuously of Agrafena Alexandrovna as“the kept mistress of Samsonov.” He would have given a good deal to takeback his words afterwards, for Fetyukovitch caught him out over it atonce. And it was all because Rakitin had not reckoned on the lawyer havingbeen able to become so intimately acquainted with every detail in so shorta time.
“Allow me to ask,” began the counsel for the defense, with the mostaffable and even respectful smile, “you are, of course, the same Mr.Rakitin whose pamphlet, _The Life of the Deceased Elder, Father Zossima_,published by the diocesan authorities, full of profound and religiousreflections and preceded by an excellent and devout dedication to thebishop, I have just read with such pleasure?”
“I did not write it for publication ... it was published afterwards,”muttered Rakitin, for some reason fearfully disconcerted and almostashamed.
“Oh, that’s excellent! A thinker like you can, and indeed ought to, takethe widest view of every social question. Your most instructive pamphlethas been widely circulated through the patronage of the bishop, and hasbeen of appreciable service.... But this is the chief thing I should liketo learn from you. You stated just now that you were very intimatelyacquainted with Madame Svyetlov.” (It must be noted that Grushenka’ssurname was Svyetlov. I heard it for the first time that day, during thecase.)
“I cannot answer for all my acquaintances.... I am a young man ... and whocan be responsible for every one he meets?” cried Rakitin, flushing allover.
“I understand, I quite understand,” cried Fetyukovitch, as though he, too,were embarrassed and in haste to excuse himself. “You, like any other,might well be interested in an acquaintance with a young and beautifulwoman who would readily entertain the _élite_ of the youth of theneighborhood, but ... I only wanted to know ... It has come to myknowledge that Madame Svyetlov was particularly anxious a couple of monthsago to make the acquaintance of the younger Karamazov, AlexeyFyodorovitch, and promised you twenty‐five roubles, if you would bring himto her in his monastic dress. And that actually took place on the eveningof the day on which the terrible crime, which is the subject of thepresent investigation, was committed. You brought Alexey Karamazov toMadame Svyetlov, and did you receive the twenty‐five roubles from MadameSvyetlov as a reward, that’s what I wanted to hear from you?”
“It was a joke.... I don’t see of what interest that can be to you.... Itook it for a joke ... meaning to give it back later....”
“Then you did take— But you have not given it back yet ... or have you?”
“That’s of no consequence,” muttered Rakitin, “I refuse to answer suchquestions.... Of course I shall give it back.”
The President intervened, but Fetyukovitch declared he had no morequestions to ask of the witness. Mr. Rakitin left the witness‐box notabsolutely without a stain upon his character. The effect left by thelofty idealism of his speech was somewhat marred, and Fetyukovitch’sexpression, as he watched him walk away, seemed to suggest to the public“this is a specimen of the lofty‐minded persons who accuse him.” Iremember that this incident, too, did not pass off without an outbreakfrom Mitya. Enraged by the tone in which Rakitin had referred toGrushenka, he suddenly shouted “Bernard!” When, after Rakitin’s cross‐examination, the President asked the prisoner if he had anything to say,Mitya cried loudly:
“Since I’ve been arrested, he has borrowed money from me! He is acontemptible Bernard and opportunist, and he doesn’t believe in God; hetook the bishop in!”
Mitya, of course, was pulled up again for the intemperance of hislanguage, but Rakitin was done for. Captain Snegiryov’s evidence was afailure, too, but from quite a different reason. He appeared in ragged anddirty clothes, muddy boots, and in spite of the vigilance and expertobservation of the police officers, he turned out to be hopelessly drunk.On being asked about Mitya’s attack upon him, he refused to answer.
“God bless him. Ilusha told me not to. God will make it up to me yonder.”
“Who told you not to tell? Of whom are you talking?”
“Ilusha, my little son. ‘Father, father, how he insulted you!’ He saidthat at the stone. Now he is dying....”
The captain suddenly began sobbing, and plumped down on his knees beforethe President. He was hurriedly led away amidst the laughter of thepublic. The effect prepared by the prosecutor did not come off at all.
Fetyukovitch went on making the most of every opportunity, and amazedpeople more and more by his minute knowledge of the case. Thus, forexample, Trifon Borissovitch made a great impression, of course, veryprejudicial to Mitya. He calculated almost on his fingers that on hisfirst visit to Mokroe, Mitya must have spent three thousand roubles, “orvery little less. Just think what he squandered on those gypsy girlsalone! And as for our lousy peasants, it wasn’t a case of flinging half arouble in the street, he made them presents of twenty‐five roubles each,at least, he didn’t give them less. And what a lot of money was simplystolen from him! And if any one did steal, he did not leave a receipt. Howcould one catch the thief when he was flinging his money away all thetime? Our peasants are robbers, you know; they have no care for theirsouls. And the way he went on with the girls, our village girls! They’recompletely set up since then, I tell you, they used to be poor.” Herecalled, in fact, every item of expense and added it all up. So thetheory that only fifteen hundred had been spent and the rest had been putaside in a little bag seemed inconceivable.
“I saw three thousand as clear as a penny in his hands, I saw it with myown eyes; I should think I ought to know how to reckon money,” criedTrifon Borissovitch, doing his best to satisfy “his betters.”
When Fetyukovitch had to cross‐examine him, he scarcely tried to refutehis evidence, but began asking him about an incident at the first carousalat Mokroe, a month before the arrest, when Timofey and another peasantcalled Akim had picked up on the floor in the passage a hundred roublesdropped by Mitya when he was drunk, and had given them to TrifonBorissovitch and received a rouble each from him for doing so. “Well,”asked the lawyer, “did you give that hundred roubles back to Mr.Karamazov?” Trifon Borissovitch shuffled in vain.... He was obliged, afterthe peasants had been examined, to admit the finding of the hundredroubles, only adding that he had religiously returned it all to DmitriFyodorovitch “in perfect honesty, and it’s only because his honor was inliquor at the time, he wouldn’t remember it.” But, as he had denied theincident of the hundred roubles till the peasants had been called to proveit, his evidence as to returning the money to Mitya was naturally regardedwith great suspicion. So one of the most dangerous witnesses broughtforward by the prosecution was again discredited.
The same thing happened with the Poles. They took up an attitude of prideand independence; they vociferated loudly that they had both been in theservice of the Crown, and that “Pan Mitya” had offered them three thousand“to buy their honor,” and that they had seen a large sum of money in hishands. Pan Mussyalovitch introduced a terrible number of Polish words intohis sentences, and seeing that this only increased his consequence in theeyes of the President and the prosecutor, grew more and more pompous, andended by talking in Polish altogether. But Fetyukovitch caught them, too,in his snares. Trifon Borissovitch, recalled, was forced, in spite of hisevasions, to admit that Pan Vrublevsky had substituted another pack ofcards for the one he had provided, and that Pan Mussyalovitch had cheatedduring the game. Kalganov confirmed this, and both the Poles left thewitness‐box with damaged reputations, amidst laughter from the public.
Then exactly the same thing happened with almost all the most dangerouswitnesses. Fetyukovitch succeeded in casting a slur on all of them, anddismissing them with a certain derision. The lawyers and experts were lostin admiration, and were only at a loss to understand what good purposecould be served by it, for all, I repeat, felt that the case for theprosecution could not be refuted, but was growing more and more tragicallyoverwhelming. But from the confidence of the “great magician” they sawthat he was serene, and they waited, feeling that “such a man” had notcome from Petersburg for nothing, and that he was not a man to returnunsuccessful.


Chapter III. The Medical Experts And A Pound Of Nuts

The evidence of the medical experts, too, was of little use to theprisoner. And it appeared later that Fetyukovitch had not reckoned muchupon it. The medical line of defense had only been taken up through theinsistence of Katerina Ivanovna, who had sent for a celebrated doctor fromMoscow on purpose. The case for the defense could, of course, lose nothingby it and might, with luck, gain something from it. There was, however, anelement of comedy about it, through the difference of opinion of thedoctors. The medical experts were the famous doctor from Moscow, ourdoctor, Herzenstube, and the young doctor, Varvinsky. The two latterappeared also as witnesses for the prosecution.
The first to be called in the capacity of expert was Doctor Herzenstube.He was a gray and bald old man of seventy, of middle height and sturdybuild. He was much esteemed and respected by every one in the town. He wasa conscientious doctor and an excellent and pious man, a Hernguter orMoravian brother, I am not quite sure which. He had been living amongst usfor many years and behaved with wonderful dignity. He was a kind‐heartedand humane man. He treated the sick poor and peasants for nothing, visitedthem in their slums and huts, and left money for medicine, but he was asobstinate as a mule. If once he had taken an idea into his head, there wasno shaking it. Almost every one in the town was aware, by the way, thatthe famous doctor had, within the first two or three days of his presenceamong us, uttered some extremely offensive allusions to DoctorHerzenstube’s qualifications. Though the Moscow doctor asked twenty‐fiveroubles for a visit, several people in the town were glad to takeadvantage of his arrival, and rushed to consult him regardless of expense.All these had, of course, been previously patients of Doctor Herzenstube,and the celebrated doctor had criticized his treatment with extremeharshness. Finally, he had asked the patients as soon as he saw them,“Well, who has been cramming you with nostrums? Herzenstube? He, he!”Doctor Herzenstube, of course, heard all this, and now all the threedoctors made their appearance, one after another, to be examined.
Doctor Herzenstube roundly declared that the abnormality of the prisoner’smental faculties was self‐evident. Then giving his grounds for thisopinion, which I omit here, he added that the abnormality was not onlyevident in many of the prisoner’s actions in the past, but was apparenteven now at this very moment. When he was asked to explain how it wasapparent now at this moment, the old doctor, with simple‐hearteddirectness, pointed out that the prisoner on entering the court had “anextraordinary air, remarkable in the circumstances”; that he had “marchedin like a soldier, looking straight before him, though it would have beenmore natural for him to look to the left where, among the public, theladies were sitting, seeing that he was a great admirer of the fair sexand must be thinking much of what the ladies are saying of him now,” theold man concluded in his peculiar language.
I must add that he spoke Russian readily, but every phrase was formed inGerman style, which did not, however, trouble him, for it had always beena weakness of his to believe that he spoke Russian perfectly, betterindeed than Russians. And he was very fond of using Russian proverbs,always declaring that the Russian proverbs were the best and mostexpressive sayings in the whole world. I may remark, too, that inconversation, through absent‐mindedness he often forgot the most ordinarywords, which sometimes went out of his head, though he knew themperfectly. The same thing happened, though, when he spoke German, and atsuch times he always waved his hand before his face as though trying tocatch the lost word, and no one could induce him to go on speaking till hehad found the missing word. His remark that the prisoner ought to havelooked at the ladies on entering roused a whisper of amusement in theaudience. All our ladies were very fond of our old doctor; they knew, too,that having been all his life a bachelor and a religious man of exemplaryconduct, he looked upon women as lofty creatures. And so his unexpectedobservation struck every one as very queer.
The Moscow doctor, being questioned in his turn, definitely andemphatically repeated that he considered the prisoner’s mental conditionabnormal in the highest degree. He talked at length and with erudition of“aberration” and “mania,” and argued that, from all the facts collected,the prisoner had undoubtedly been in a condition of aberration for severaldays before his arrest, and, if the crime had been committed by him, itmust, even if he were conscious of it, have been almost involuntary, as hehad not the power to control the morbid impulse that possessed him.
But apart from temporary aberration, the doctor diagnosed mania, whichpremised, in his words, to lead to complete insanity in the future. (Itmust be noted that I report this in my own words, the doctor made use ofvery learned and professional language.) “All his actions are incontravention of common sense and logic,” he continued. “Not to refer towhat I have not seen, that is, the crime itself and the whole catastrophe,the day before yesterday, while he was talking to me, he had anunaccountably fixed look in his eye. He laughed unexpectedly when therewas nothing to laugh at. He showed continual and inexplicableirritability, using strange words, ‘Bernard!’ ‘Ethics!’ and others equallyinappropriate.” But the doctor detected mania, above all, in the fact thatthe prisoner could not even speak of the three thousand roubles, of whichhe considered himself to have been cheated, without extraordinaryirritation, though he could speak comparatively lightly of othermisfortunes and grievances. According to all accounts, he had even in thepast, whenever the subject of the three thousand roubles was touched on,flown into a perfect frenzy, and yet he was reported to be a disinterestedand not grasping man.
“As to the opinion of my learned colleague,” the Moscow doctor addedironically in conclusion, “that the prisoner would, on entering the court,have naturally looked at the ladies and not straight before him, I willonly say that, apart from the playfulness of this theory, it is radicallyunsound. For though I fully agree that the prisoner, on entering the courtwhere his fate will be decided, would not naturally look straight beforehim in that fixed way, and that that may really be a sign of his abnormalmental condition, at the same time I maintain that he would naturally notlook to the left at the ladies, but, on the contrary, to the right to findhis legal adviser, on whose help all his hopes rest and on whose defenseall his future depends.” The doctor expressed his opinion positively andemphatically.
But the unexpected pronouncement of Doctor Varvinsky gave the last touchof comedy to the difference of opinion between the experts. In his opinionthe prisoner was now, and had been all along, in a perfectly normalcondition, and, although he certainly must have been in a nervous andexceedingly excited state before his arrest, this might have been due toseveral perfectly obvious causes, jealousy, anger, continual drunkenness,and so on. But this nervous condition would not involve the mentalaberration of which mention had just been made. As to the question whetherthe prisoner should have looked to the left or to the right on enteringthe court, “in his modest opinion,” the prisoner would naturally lookstraight before him on entering the court, as he had in fact done, as thatwas where the judges, on whom his fate depended, were sitting. So that itwas just by looking straight before him that he showed his perfectlynormal state of mind at the present. The young doctor concluded his“modest” testimony with some heat.
“Bravo, doctor!” cried Mitya, from his seat, “just so!”
Mitya, of course, was checked, but the young doctor’s opinion had adecisive influence on the judges and on the public, and, as appearedafterwards, every one agreed with him. But Doctor Herzenstube, when calledas a witness, was quite unexpectedly of use to Mitya. As an old residentin the town who had known the Karamazov family for years, he furnishedsome facts of great value for the prosecution, and suddenly, as thoughrecalling something, he added:
“But the poor young man might have had a very different life, for he had agood heart both in childhood and after childhood, that I know. But theRussian proverb says, ‘If a man has one head, it’s good, but if anotherclever man comes to visit him, it would be better still, for then therewill be two heads and not only one.’ ”
“One head is good, but two are better,” the prosecutor put in impatiently.He knew the old man’s habit of talking slowly and deliberately, regardlessof the impression he was making and of the delay he was causing, andhighly prizing his flat, dull and always gleefully complacent German wit.The old man was fond of making jokes.
“Oh, yes, that’s what I say,” he went on stubbornly. “One head is good,but two are much better, but he did not meet another head with wits, andhis wits went. Where did they go? I’ve forgotten the word.” He went on,passing his hand before his eyes, “Oh, yes, _spazieren_.”
“Wandering?”
“Oh, yes, wandering, that’s what I say. Well, his wits went wandering andfell in such a deep hole that he lost himself. And yet he was a gratefuland sensitive boy. Oh, I remember him very well, a little chap so high,left neglected by his father in the back yard, when he ran about withoutboots on his feet, and his little breeches hanging by one button.”
A note of feeling and tenderness suddenly came into the honest old man’svoice. Fetyukovitch positively started, as though scenting something, andcaught at it instantly.
“Oh, yes, I was a young man then.... I was ... well, I was forty‐fivethen, and had only just come here. And I was so sorry for the boy then; Iasked myself why shouldn’t I buy him a pound of ... a pound of what? I’veforgotten what it’s called. A pound of what children are very fond of,what is it, what is it?” The doctor began waving his hands again. “Itgrows on a tree and is gathered and given to every one....”
“Apples?”
“Oh, no, no. You have a dozen of apples, not a pound.... No, there are alot of them, and all little. You put them in the mouth and crack.”
“Nuts?”
“Quite so, nuts, I say so.” The doctor repeated in the calmest way asthough he had been at no loss for a word. “And I bought him a pound ofnuts, for no one had ever bought the boy a pound of nuts before. And Ilifted my finger and said to him, ‘Boy, _Gott der Vater_.’ He laughed andsaid, ‘_Gott der Vater_.’... ‘_Gott der Sohn_.’ He laughed again andlisped, ‘_Gott der Sohn_.’ ‘_Gott der heilige Geist_.’ Then he laughed andsaid as best he could, ‘_Gott der heilige Geist_.’ I went away, and twodays after I happened to be passing, and he shouted to me of himself,‘Uncle, _Gott der Vater, Gott der Sohn_,’ and he had only forgotten ‘_Gottder heilige Geist_.’ But I reminded him of it and I felt very sorry forhim again. But he was taken away, and I did not see him again. Twenty‐three years passed. I am sitting one morning in my study, a white‐hairedold man, when there walks into the room a blooming young man, whom Ishould never have recognized, but he held up his finger and said,laughing, ‘_Gott der Vater, Gott der Sohn_, and _Gott der heilige Geist_.I have just arrived and have come to thank you for that pound of nuts, forno one else ever bought me a pound of nuts; you are the only one that everdid.’ And then I remembered my happy youth and the poor child in the yard,without boots on his feet, and my heart was touched and I said, ‘You are agrateful young man, for you have remembered all your life the pound ofnuts I bought you in your childhood.’ And I embraced him and blessed him.And I shed tears. He laughed, but he shed tears, too ... for the Russianoften laughs when he ought to be weeping. But he did weep; I saw it. Andnow, alas!...”
“And I am weeping now, German, I am weeping now, too, you saintly man,”Mitya cried suddenly.
In any case the anecdote made a certain favorable impression on thepublic. But the chief sensation in Mitya’s favor was created by theevidence of Katerina Ivanovna, which I will describe directly. Indeed,when the witnesses _à décharge_, that is, called by the defense, begangiving evidence, fortune seemed all at once markedly more favorable toMitya, and what was particularly striking, this was a surprise even to thecounsel for the defense. But before Katerina Ivanovna was called, Alyoshawas examined, and he recalled a fact which seemed to furnish positiveevidence against one important point made by the prosecution.


Chapter IV. Fortune Smiles On Mitya

It came quite as a surprise even to Alyosha himself. He was not requiredto take the oath, and I remember that both sides addressed him very gentlyand sympathetically. It was evident that his reputation for goodness hadpreceded him. Alyosha gave his evidence modestly and with restraint, buthis warm sympathy for his unhappy brother was unmistakable. In answer toone question, he sketched his brother’s character as that of a man,violent‐tempered perhaps and carried away by his passions, but at the sametime honorable, proud and generous, capable of self‐sacrifice, ifnecessary. He admitted, however, that, through his passion for Grushenkaand his rivalry with his father, his brother had been of late in anintolerable position. But he repelled with indignation the suggestion thathis brother might have committed a murder for the sake of gain, though herecognized that the three thousand roubles had become almost an obsessionwith Mitya; that he looked upon them as part of the inheritance he hadbeen cheated of by his father, and that, indifferent as he was to money asa rule, he could not even speak of that three thousand without fury. Asfor the rivalry of the two “ladies,” as the prosecutor expressed it—thatis, of Grushenka and Katya—he answered evasively and was even unwilling toanswer one or two questions altogether.
“Did your brother tell you, anyway, that he intended to kill your father?”asked the prosecutor. “You can refuse to answer if you think necessary,”he added.
“He did not tell me so directly,” answered Alyosha.
“How so? Did he indirectly?”
“He spoke to me once of his hatred for our father and his fear that at anextreme moment ... at a moment of fury, he might perhaps murder him.”
“And you believed him?”
“I am afraid to say that I did. But I never doubted that some higherfeeling would always save him at the fatal moment, as it has indeed savedhim, for it was not he killed my father,” Alyosha said firmly, in a loudvoice that was heard throughout the court.
The prosecutor started like a war‐horse at the sound of a trumpet.
“Let me assure you that I fully believe in the complete sincerity of yourconviction and do not explain it by or identify it with your affection foryour unhappy brother. Your peculiar view of the whole tragic episode isknown to us already from the preliminary investigation. I won’t attempt toconceal from you that it is highly individual and contradicts all theother evidence collected by the prosecution. And so I think it essentialto press you to tell me what facts have led you to this conviction of yourbrother’s innocence and of the guilt of another person against whom yougave evidence at the preliminary inquiry?”
“I only answered the questions asked me at the preliminary inquiry,”replied Alyosha, slowly and calmly. “I made no accusation againstSmerdyakov of myself.”
“Yet you gave evidence against him?”
“I was led to do so by my brother Dmitri’s words. I was told what tookplace at his arrest and how he had pointed to Smerdyakov before I wasexamined. I believe absolutely that my brother is innocent, and if hedidn’t commit the murder, then—”
“Then Smerdyakov? Why Smerdyakov? And why are you so completely persuadedof your brother’s innocence?”
“I cannot help believing my brother. I know he wouldn’t lie to me. I sawfrom his face he wasn’t lying.”
“Only from his face? Is that all the proof you have?”
“I have no other proof.”
“And of Smerdyakov’s guilt you have no proof whatever but your brother’sword and the expression of his face?”
“No, I have no other proof.”
The prosecutor dropped the examination at this point. The impression leftby Alyosha’s evidence on the public was most disappointing. There had beentalk about Smerdyakov before the trial; some one had heard something, someone had pointed out something else, it was said that Alyosha had gatheredtogether some extraordinary proofs of his brother’s innocence andSmerdyakov’s guilt, and after all there was nothing, no evidence exceptcertain moral convictions so natural in a brother.
But Fetyukovitch began his cross‐examination. On his asking Alyosha whenit was that the prisoner had told him of his hatred for his father andthat he might kill him, and whether he had heard it, for instance, attheir last meeting before the catastrophe, Alyosha started as he answered,as though only just recollecting and understanding something.
“I remember one circumstance now which I’d quite forgotten myself. Itwasn’t clear to me at the time, but now—”
And, obviously only now for the first time struck by an idea, he recountedeagerly how, at his last interview with Mitya that evening under the tree,on the road to the monastery, Mitya had struck himself on the breast, “theupper part of the breast,” and had repeated several times that he had ameans of regaining his honor, that that means was here, here on hisbreast. “I thought, when he struck himself on the breast, he meant that itwas in his heart,” Alyosha continued, “that he might find in his heartstrength to save himself from some awful disgrace which was awaiting himand which he did not dare confess even to me. I must confess I did thinkat the time that he was speaking of our father, and that the disgrace hewas shuddering at was the thought of going to our father and doing someviolence to him. Yet it was just then that he pointed to something on hisbreast, so that I remember the idea struck me at the time that the heartis not on that part of the breast, but below, and that he struck himselfmuch too high, just below the neck, and kept pointing to that place. Myidea seemed silly to me at the time, but he was perhaps pointing then tothat little bag in which he had fifteen hundred roubles!”
“Just so,” Mitya cried from his place. “That’s right, Alyosha, it was thelittle bag I struck with my fist.”
Fetyukovitch flew to him in hot haste entreating him to keep quiet, and atthe same instant pounced on Alyosha. Alyosha, carried away himself by hisrecollection, warmly expressed his theory that this disgrace was probablyjust that fifteen hundred roubles on him, which he might have returned toKaterina Ivanovna as half of what he owed her, but which he had yetdetermined not to repay her and to use for another purpose—namely, toenable him to elope with Grushenka, if she consented.
“It is so, it must be so,” exclaimed Alyosha, in sudden excitement. “Mybrother cried several times that half of the disgrace, half of it (he said_half_ several times) he could free himself from at once, but that he wasso unhappy in his weakness of will that he wouldn’t do it ... that he knewbeforehand he was incapable of doing it!”
“And you clearly, confidently remember that he struck himself just on thispart of the breast?” Fetyukovitch asked eagerly.
“Clearly and confidently, for I thought at the time, ‘Why does he strikehimself up there when the heart is lower down?’ and the thought seemedstupid to me at the time ... I remember its seeming stupid ... it flashedthrough my mind. That’s what brought it back to me just now. How could Ihave forgotten it till now? It was that little bag he meant when he saidhe had the means but wouldn’t give back that fifteen hundred. And when hewas arrested at Mokroe he cried out—I know, I was told it—that heconsidered it the most disgraceful act of his life that when he had themeans of repaying Katerina Ivanovna half (half, note!) what he owed her,he yet could not bring himself to repay the money and preferred to remaina thief in her eyes rather than part with it. And what torture, whattorture that debt has been to him!” Alyosha exclaimed in conclusion.
The prosecutor, of course, intervened. He asked Alyosha to describe oncemore how it had all happened, and several times insisted on the question,“Had the prisoner seemed to point to anything? Perhaps he had simplystruck himself with his fist on the breast?”
“But it was not with his fist,” cried Alyosha; “he pointed with hisfingers and pointed here, very high up.... How could I have so completelyforgotten it till this moment?”
The President asked Mitya what he had to say to the last witness’sevidence. Mitya confirmed it, saying that he had been pointing to thefifteen hundred roubles which were on his breast, just below the neck, andthat that was, of course, the disgrace, “A disgrace I cannot deny, themost shameful act of my whole life,” cried Mitya. “I might have repaid itand didn’t repay it. I preferred to remain a thief in her eyes rather thangive it back. And the most shameful part of it was that I knew beforehandI shouldn’t give it back! You are right, Alyosha! Thanks, Alyosha!”
So Alyosha’s cross‐examination ended. What was important and strikingabout it was that one fact at least had been found, and even though thiswere only one tiny bit of evidence, a mere hint at evidence, it did gosome little way towards proving that the bag had existed and had containedfifteen hundred roubles and that the prisoner had not been lying at thepreliminary inquiry when he alleged at Mokroe that those fifteen hundredroubles were “his own.” Alyosha was glad. With a flushed face he movedaway to the seat assigned to him. He kept repeating to himself: “How wasit I forgot? How could I have forgotten it? And what made it come back tome now?”
Katerina Ivanovna was called to the witness‐box. As she entered somethingextraordinary happened in the court. The ladies clutched their lorgnettesand opera‐glasses. There was a stir among the men: some stood up to get abetter view. Everybody alleged afterwards that Mitya had turned “white asa sheet” on her entrance. All in black, she advanced modestly, almosttimidly. It was impossible to tell from her face that she was agitated;but there was a resolute gleam in her dark and gloomy eyes. I may remarkthat many people mentioned that she looked particularly handsome at thatmoment. She spoke softly but clearly, so that she was heard all over thecourt. She expressed herself with composure, or at least tried to appearcomposed. The President began his examination discreetly and veryrespectfully, as though afraid to touch on “certain chords,” and showingconsideration for her great unhappiness. But in answer to one of the firstquestions Katerina Ivanovna replied firmly that she had been formerlybetrothed to the prisoner, “until he left me of his own accord...” sheadded quietly. When they asked her about the three thousand she hadentrusted to Mitya to post to her relations, she said firmly, “I didn’tgive him the money simply to send it off. I felt at the time that he wasin great need of money.... I gave him the three thousand on theunderstanding that he should post it within the month if he cared to.There was no need for him to worry himself about that debt afterwards.”
I will not repeat all the questions asked her and all her answers indetail. I will only give the substance of her evidence.
“I was firmly convinced that he would send off that sum as soon as he gotmoney from his father,” she went on. “I have never doubted hisdisinterestedness and his honesty ... his scrupulous honesty ... in moneymatters. He felt quite certain that he would receive the money from hisfather, and spoke to me several times about it. I knew he had a feud withhis father and have always believed that he had been unfairly treated byhis father. I don’t remember any threat uttered by him against his father.He certainly never uttered any such threat before me. If he had come to meat that time, I should have at once relieved his anxiety about thatunlucky three thousand roubles, but he had given up coming to see me ...and I myself was put in such a position ... that I could not invitehim.... And I had no right, indeed, to be exacting as to that money,” sheadded suddenly, and there was a ring of resolution in her voice. “I wasonce indebted to him for assistance in money for more than three thousand,and I took it, although I could not at that time foresee that I shouldever be in a position to repay my debt.”
There was a note of defiance in her voice. It was then Fetyukovitch beganhis cross‐examination.
“Did that take place not here, but at the beginning of your acquaintance?”Fetyukovitch suggested cautiously, feeling his way, instantly scentingsomething favorable. I must mention in parenthesis that, thoughFetyukovitch had been brought from Petersburg partly at the instance ofKaterina Ivanovna herself, he knew nothing about the episode of the fourthousand roubles given her by Mitya, and of her “bowing to the ground tohim.” She concealed this from him and said nothing about it, and that wasstrange. It may be pretty certainly assumed that she herself did not knowtill the very last minute whether she would speak of that episode in thecourt, and waited for the inspiration of the moment.
No, I can never forget those moments. She began telling her story. Shetold everything, the whole episode that Mitya had told Alyosha, and herbowing to the ground, and her reason. She told about her father and hergoing to Mitya, and did not in one word, in a single hint, suggest thatMitya had himself, through her sister, proposed they should “send himKaterina Ivanovna” to fetch the money. She generously concealed that andwas not ashamed to make it appear as though she had of her own impulse runto the young officer, relying on something ... to beg him for the money.It was something tremendous! I turned cold and trembled as I listened. Thecourt was hushed, trying to catch each word. It was something unexampled.Even from such a self‐willed and contemptuously proud girl as she was,such an extremely frank avowal, such sacrifice, such self‐immolation,seemed incredible. And for what, for whom? To save the man who haddeceived and insulted her and to help, in however small a degree, insaving him, by creating a strong impression in his favor. And, indeed, thefigure of the young officer who, with a respectful bow to the innocentgirl, handed her his last four thousand roubles—all he had in theworld—was thrown into a very sympathetic and attractive light, but ... Ihad a painful misgiving at heart! I felt that calumny might come of itlater (and it did, in fact, it did). It was repeated all over the townafterwards with spiteful laughter that the story was perhaps not quitecomplete—that is, in the statement that the officer had let the young ladydepart “with nothing but a respectful bow.” It was hinted that somethingwas here omitted.
“And even if nothing had been omitted, if this were the whole story,” themost highly respected of our ladies maintained, “even then it’s verydoubtful whether it was creditable for a young girl to behave in that way,even for the sake of saving her father.”
And can Katerina Ivanovna, with her intelligence, her morbidsensitiveness, have failed to understand that people would talk like that?She must have understood it, yet she made up her mind to tell everything.Of course, all these nasty little suspicions as to the truth of her storyonly arose afterwards and at the first moment all were deeply impressed byit. As for the judges and the lawyers, they listened in reverent, almostshame‐faced silence to Katerina Ivanovna. The prosecutor did not ventureupon even one question on the subject. Fetyukovitch made a low bow to her.Oh, he was almost triumphant! Much ground had been gained. For a man togive his last four thousand on a generous impulse and then for the sameman to murder his father for the sake of robbing him of three thousand—theidea seemed too incongruous. Fetyukovitch felt that now the charge oftheft, at least, was as good as disproved. “The case” was thrown intoquite a different light. There was a wave of sympathy for Mitya. As forhim.... I was told that once or twice, while Katerina Ivanovna was givingher evidence, he jumped up from his seat, sank back again, and hid hisface in his hands. But when she had finished, he suddenly cried in asobbing voice:
“Katya, why have you ruined me?” and his sobs were audible all over thecourt. But he instantly restrained himself, and cried again:
“Now I am condemned!”
Then he sat rigid in his place, with his teeth clenched and his armsacross his chest. Katerina Ivanovna remained in the court and sat down inher place. She was pale and sat with her eyes cast down. Those who weresitting near her declared that for a long time she shivered all over asthough in a fever. Grushenka was called.
I am approaching the sudden catastrophe which was perhaps the final causeof Mitya’s ruin. For I am convinced, so is every one—all the lawyers saidthe same afterwards—that if the episode had not occurred, the prisonerwould at least have been recommended to mercy. But of that later. A fewwords first about Grushenka.
She, too, was dressed entirely in black, with her magnificent black shawlon her shoulders. She walked to the witness‐box with her smooth, noiselesstread, with the slightly swaying gait common in women of full figure. Shelooked steadily at the President, turning her eyes neither to the rightnor to the left. To my thinking she looked very handsome at that moment,and not at all pale, as the ladies alleged afterwards. They declared, too,that she had a concentrated and spiteful expression. I believe that shewas simply irritated and painfully conscious of the contemptuous andinquisitive eyes of our scandal‐loving public. She was proud and could notstand contempt. She was one of those people who flare up, angry and eagerto retaliate, at the mere suggestion of contempt. There was an element oftimidity, too, of course, and inward shame at her own timidity, so it wasnot strange that her tone kept changing. At one moment it was angry,contemptuous and rough, and at another there was a sincere note of self‐condemnation. Sometimes she spoke as though she were taking a desperateplunge; as though she felt, “I don’t care what happens, I’ll say it....”Apropos of her acquaintance with Fyodor Pavlovitch, she remarked curtly,“That’s all nonsense, and was it my fault that he would pester me?” But aminute later she added, “It was all my fault. I was laughing at themboth—at the old man and at him, too—and I brought both of them to this. Itwas all on account of me it happened.”
Samsonov’s name came up somehow. “That’s nobody’s business,” she snappedat once, with a sort of insolent defiance. “He was my benefactor; he tookme when I hadn’t a shoe to my foot, when my family had turned me out.” ThePresident reminded her, though very politely, that she must answer thequestions directly, without going off into irrelevant details. Grushenkacrimsoned and her eyes flashed.
The envelope with the notes in it she had not seen, but had only heardfrom “that wicked wretch” that Fyodor Pavlovitch had an envelope withnotes for three thousand in it. “But that was all foolishness. I was onlylaughing. I wouldn’t have gone to him for anything.”
“To whom are you referring as ‘that wicked wretch’?” inquired theprosecutor.
“The lackey, Smerdyakov, who murdered his master and hanged himself lastnight.”
She was, of course, at once asked what ground she had for such a definiteaccusation; but it appeared that she, too, had no grounds for it.
“Dmitri Fyodorovitch told me so himself; you can believe him. The womanwho came between us has ruined him; she is the cause of it all, let metell you,” Grushenka added. She seemed to be quivering with hatred, andthere was a vindictive note in her voice.
She was again asked to whom she was referring.
“The young lady, Katerina Ivanovna there. She sent for me, offered mechocolate, tried to fascinate me. There’s not much true shame about her, Ican tell you that....”
At this point the President checked her sternly, begging her to moderateher language. But the jealous woman’s heart was burning, and she did notcare what she did.
“When the prisoner was arrested at Mokroe,” the prosecutor asked, “everyone saw and heard you run out of the next room and cry out: ‘It’s all myfault. We’ll go to Siberia together!’ So you already believed him to havemurdered his father?”
“I don’t remember what I felt at the time,” answered Grushenka. “Every onewas crying out that he had killed his father, and I felt that it was myfault, that it was on my account he had murdered him. But when he said hewasn’t guilty, I believed him at once, and I believe him now and alwaysshall believe him. He is not the man to tell a lie.”
Fetyukovitch began his cross‐examination. I remember that among otherthings he asked about Rakitin and the twenty‐five roubles “you paid himfor bringing Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov to see you.”
“There was nothing strange about his taking the money,” sneered Grushenka,with angry contempt. “He was always coming to me for money: he used to getthirty roubles a month at least out of me, chiefly for luxuries: he hadenough to keep him without my help.”
“What led you to be so liberal to Mr. Rakitin?” Fetyukovitch asked, inspite of an uneasy movement on the part of the President.
“Why, he is my cousin. His mother was my mother’s sister. But he’s alwaysbesought me not to tell any one here of it, he is so dreadfully ashamed ofme.”
This fact was a complete surprise to every one; no one in the town nor inthe monastery, not even Mitya, knew of it. I was told that Rakitin turnedpurple with shame where he sat. Grushenka had somehow heard before shecame into the court that he had given evidence against Mitya, and so shewas angry. The whole effect on the public, of Rakitin’s speech, of hisnoble sentiments, of his attacks upon serfdom and the political disorderof Russia, was this time finally ruined. Fetyukovitch was satisfied: itwas another godsend. Grushenka’s cross‐examination did not last long and,of course, there could be nothing particularly new in her evidence. Sheleft a very disagreeable impression on the public; hundreds ofcontemptuous eyes were fixed upon her, as she finished giving her evidenceand sat down again in the court, at a good distance from KaterinaIvanovna. Mitya was silent throughout her evidence. He sat as thoughturned to stone, with his eyes fixed on the ground.
Ivan was called to give evidence.


Chapter V. A Sudden Catastrophe

I may note that he had been called before Alyosha. But the usher of thecourt announced to the President that, owing to an attack of illness orsome sort of fit, the witness could not appear at the moment, but wasready to give his evidence as soon as he recovered. But no one seemed tohave heard it and it only came out later.
His entrance was for the first moment almost unnoticed. The principalwitnesses, especially the two rival ladies, had already been questioned.Curiosity was satisfied for the time; the public was feeling almostfatigued. Several more witnesses were still to be heard, who probably hadlittle information to give after all that had been given. Time waspassing. Ivan walked up with extraordinary slowness, looking at no one,and with his head bowed, as though plunged in gloomy thought. He wasirreproachably dressed, but his face made a painful impression, on me atleast: there was an earthy look in it, a look like a dying man’s. His eyeswere lusterless; he raised them and looked slowly round the court. Alyoshajumped up from his seat and moaned “Ah!” I remember that, but it washardly noticed.
The President began by informing him that he was a witness not on oath,that he might answer or refuse to answer, but that, of course, he mustbear witness according to his conscience, and so on, and so on. Ivanlistened and looked at him blankly, but his face gradually relaxed into asmile, and as soon as the President, looking at him in astonishment,finished, he laughed outright.
“Well, and what else?” he asked in a loud voice.
There was a hush in the court; there was a feeling of something strange.The President showed signs of uneasiness.
“You ... are perhaps still unwell?” he began, looking everywhere for theusher.
“Don’t trouble yourself, your excellency, I am well enough and can tellyou something interesting,” Ivan answered with sudden calmness andrespectfulness.
“You have some special communication to make?” the President went on,still mistrustfully.
Ivan looked down, waited a few seconds and, raising his head, answered,almost stammering:
“No ... I haven’t. I have nothing particular.”
They began asking him questions. He answered, as it were, reluctantly,with extreme brevity, with a sort of disgust which grew more and moremarked, though he answered rationally. To many questions he answered thathe did not know. He knew nothing of his father’s money relations withDmitri. “I wasn’t interested in the subject,” he added. Threats to murderhis father he had heard from the prisoner. Of the money in the envelope hehad heard from Smerdyakov.
“The same thing over and over again,” he interrupted suddenly, with a lookof weariness. “I have nothing particular to tell the court.”
“I see you are unwell and understand your feelings,” the President began.
He turned to the prosecutor and the counsel for the defense to invite themto examine the witness, if necessary, when Ivan suddenly asked in anexhausted voice:
“Let me go, your excellency, I feel very ill.”
And with these words, without waiting for permission, he turned to walkout of the court. But after taking four steps he stood still, as though hehad reached a decision, smiled slowly, and went back.
“I am like the peasant girl, your excellency ... you know. How does it go?‘I’ll stand up if I like, and I won’t if I don’t.’ They were trying to puton her sarafan to take her to church to be married, and she said, ‘I’llstand up if I like, and I won’t if I don’t.’... It’s in some book aboutthe peasantry.”
“What do you mean by that?” the President asked severely.
“Why, this,” Ivan suddenly pulled out a roll of notes. “Here’s the money... the notes that lay in that envelope” (he nodded towards the table onwhich lay the material evidence), “for the sake of which our father wasmurdered. Where shall I put them? Mr. Superintendent, take them.”
The usher of the court took the whole roll and handed it to the President.
“How could this money have come into your possession if it is the samemoney?” the President asked wonderingly.
“I got them from Smerdyakov, from the murderer, yesterday.... I was withhim just before he hanged himself. It was he, not my brother, killed ourfather. He murdered him and I incited him to do it ... Who doesn’t desirehis father’s death?”
“Are you in your right mind?” broke involuntarily from the President.
“I should think I am in my right mind ... in the same nasty mind as all ofyou ... as all these ... ugly faces.” He turned suddenly to the audience.“My father has been murdered and they pretend they are horrified,” hesnarled, with furious contempt. “They keep up the sham with one another.Liars! They all desire the death of their fathers. One reptile devoursanother.... If there hadn’t been a murder, they’d have been angry and gonehome ill‐humored. It’s a spectacle they want! _Panem et circenses_. ThoughI am one to talk! Have you any water? Give me a drink for Christ’s sake!”He suddenly clutched his head.
The usher at once approached him. Alyosha jumped up and cried, “He is ill.Don’t believe him: he has brain fever.” Katerina Ivanovna rose impulsivelyfrom her seat and, rigid with horror, gazed at Ivan. Mitya stood up andgreedily looked at his brother and listened to him with a wild, strangesmile.
“Don’t disturb yourselves. I am not mad, I am only a murderer,” Ivan beganagain. “You can’t expect eloquence from a murderer,” he added suddenly forsome reason and laughed a queer laugh.
The prosecutor bent over to the President in obvious dismay. The two otherjudges communicated in agitated whispers. Fetyukovitch pricked up his earsas he listened: the hall was hushed in expectation. The President seemedsuddenly to recollect himself.
“Witness, your words are incomprehensible and impossible here. Calmyourself, if you can, and tell your story ... if you really have somethingto tell. How can you confirm your statement ... if indeed you are notdelirious?”
“That’s just it. I have no proof. That cur Smerdyakov won’t send youproofs from the other world ... in an envelope. You think of nothing butenvelopes—one is enough. I’ve no witnesses ... except one, perhaps,” hesmiled thoughtfully.
“Who is your witness?”
“He has a tail, your excellency, and that would be irregular! _Le diablen’existe point!_ Don’t pay attention: he is a paltry, pitiful devil,” headded suddenly. He ceased laughing and spoke as it were, confidentially.“He is here somewhere, no doubt—under that table with the materialevidence on it, perhaps. Where should he sit if not there? You see, listento me. I told him I don’t want to keep quiet, and he talked about thegeological cataclysm ... idiocy! Come, release the monster ... he’s beensinging a hymn. That’s because his heart is light! It’s like a drunken manin the street bawling how ‘Vanka went to Petersburg,’ and I would give aquadrillion quadrillions for two seconds of joy. You don’t know me! Oh,how stupid all this business is! Come, take me instead of him! I didn’tcome for nothing.... Why, why is everything so stupid?...”
And he began slowly, and as it were reflectively, looking round him again.But the court was all excitement by now. Alyosha rushed towards him, butthe court usher had already seized Ivan by the arm.
“What are you about?” he cried, staring into the man’s face, and suddenlyseizing him by the shoulders, he flung him violently to the floor. But thepolice were on the spot and he was seized. He screamed furiously. And allthe time he was being removed, he yelled and screamed somethingincoherent.
The whole court was thrown into confusion. I don’t remember everything asit happened. I was excited myself and could not follow. I only know thatafterwards, when everything was quiet again and every one understood whathad happened, the court usher came in for a reprimand, though he veryreasonably explained that the witness had been quite well, that the doctorhad seen him an hour ago, when he had a slight attack of giddiness, butthat, until he had come into the court, he had talked quite consecutively,so that nothing could have been foreseen—that he had, in fact, insisted ongiving evidence. But before every one had completely regained theircomposure and recovered from this scene, it was followed by another.Katerina Ivanovna had an attack of hysterics. She sobbed, shriekingloudly, but refused to leave the court, struggled, and besought them notto remove her. Suddenly she cried to the President:
“There is more evidence I must give at once ... at once! Here is adocument, a letter ... take it, read it quickly, quickly! It’s a letterfrom that monster ... that man there, there!” she pointed to Mitya. “Itwas he killed his father, you will see that directly. He wrote to me howhe would kill his father! But the other one is ill, he is ill, he isdelirious!” she kept crying out, beside herself.
The court usher took the document she held out to the President, and she,dropping into her chair, hiding her face in her hands, began convulsivelyand noiselessly sobbing, shaking all over, and stifling every sound forfear she should be ejected from the court. The document she had handed upwas that letter Mitya had written at the “Metropolis” tavern, which Ivanhad spoken of as a “mathematical proof.” Alas! its mathematicalconclusiveness was recognized, and had it not been for that letter, Mityamight have escaped his doom or, at least, that doom would have been lessterrible. It was, I repeat, difficult to notice every detail. Whatfollowed is still confused to my mind. The President must, I suppose, haveat once passed on the document to the judges, the jury, and the lawyers onboth sides. I only remember how they began examining the witness. On beinggently asked by the President whether she had recovered sufficiently,Katerina Ivanovna exclaimed impetuously:
“I am ready, I am ready! I am quite equal to answering you,” she added,evidently still afraid that she would somehow be prevented from givingevidence. She was asked to explain in detail what this letter was andunder what circumstances she received it.
“I received it the day before the crime was committed, but he wrote it theday before that, at the tavern—that is, two days before he committed thecrime. Look, it is written on some sort of bill!” she cried breathlessly.“He hated me at that time, because he had behaved contemptibly and wasrunning after that creature ... and because he owed me that threethousand.... Oh! he was humiliated by that three thousand on account ofhis own meanness! This is how it happened about that three thousand. I begyou, I beseech you, to hear me. Three weeks before he murdered his father,he came to me one morning. I knew he was in want of money, and what hewanted it for. Yes, yes—to win that creature and carry her off. I knewthen that he had been false to me and meant to abandon me, and it was I,I, who gave him that money, who offered it to him on the pretext of hissending it to my sister in Moscow. And as I gave it him, I looked him inthe face and said that he could send it when he liked, ‘in a month’s timewould do.’ How, how could he have failed to understand that I waspractically telling him to his face, ‘You want money to be false to mewith your creature, so here’s the money for you. I give it to you myself.Take it, if you have so little honor as to take it!’ I wanted to provewhat he was, and what happened? He took it, he took it, and squandered itwith that creature in one night.... But he knew, he knew that I knew allabout it. I assure you he understood, too, that I gave him that money totest him, to see whether he was so lost to all sense of honor as to takeit from me. I looked into his eyes and he looked into mine, and heunderstood it all and he took it—he carried off my money!”
“That’s true, Katya,” Mitya roared suddenly, “I looked into your eyes andI knew that you were dishonoring me, and yet I took your money. Despise meas a scoundrel, despise me, all of you! I’ve deserved it!”
“Prisoner,” cried the President, “another word and I will order you to beremoved.”
“That money was a torment to him,” Katya went on with impulsive haste. “Hewanted to repay it me. He wanted to, that’s true; but he needed money forthat creature, too. So he murdered his father, but he didn’t repay me, andwent off with her to that village where he was arrested. There, again, hesquandered the money he had stolen after the murder of his father. And aday before the murder he wrote me this letter. He was drunk when he wroteit. I saw it at once, at the time. He wrote it from spite, and feelingcertain, positively certain, that I should never show it to any one, evenif he did kill him, or else he wouldn’t have written it. For he knew Ishouldn’t want to revenge myself and ruin him! But read it, read itattentively—more attentively, please—and you will see that he haddescribed it all in his letter, all beforehand, how he would kill hisfather and where his money was kept. Look, please, don’t overlook that,there’s one phrase there, ‘I shall kill him as soon as Ivan has goneaway.’ So he thought it all out beforehand how he would kill him,”Katerina Ivanovna pointed out to the court with venomous and malignanttriumph. Oh! it was clear she had studied every line of that letter anddetected every meaning underlining it. “If he hadn’t been drunk, hewouldn’t have written to me; but, look, everything is written therebeforehand, just as he committed the murder after. A complete program ofit!” she exclaimed frantically.
She was reckless now of all consequences to herself, though, no doubt, shehad foreseen them even a month ago, for even then, perhaps, shaking withanger, she had pondered whether to show it at the trial or not. Now shehad taken the fatal plunge. I remember that the letter was read aloud bythe clerk, directly afterwards, I believe. It made an overwhelmingimpression. They asked Mitya whether he admitted having written theletter.
“It’s mine, mine!” cried Mitya. “I shouldn’t have written it, if I hadn’tbeen drunk!... We’ve hated each other for many things, Katya, but I swear,I swear I loved you even while I hated you, and you didn’t love me!”
He sank back on his seat, wringing his hands in despair. The prosecutorand counsel for the defense began cross‐examining her, chiefly toascertain what had induced her to conceal such a document and to give herevidence in quite a different tone and spirit just before.
“Yes, yes. I was telling lies just now. I was lying against my honor andmy conscience, but I wanted to save him, for he has hated and despised meso!” Katya cried madly. “Oh, he has despised me horribly, he has alwaysdespised me, and do you know, he has despised me from the very moment thatI bowed down to him for that money. I saw that.... I felt it at once atthe time, but for a long time I wouldn’t believe it. How often I have readit in his eyes, ‘You came of yourself, though.’ Oh, he didn’t understand,he had no idea why I ran to him, he can suspect nothing but baseness, hejudged me by himself, he thought every one was like himself!” Katya hissedfuriously, in a perfect frenzy. “And he only wanted to marry me, becauseI’d inherited a fortune, because of that, because of that! I alwayssuspected it was because of that! Oh, he is a brute! He was alwaysconvinced that I should be trembling with shame all my life before him,because I went to him then, and that he had a right to despise me for everfor it, and so to be superior to me—that’s why he wanted to marry me!That’s so, that’s all so! I tried to conquer him by my love—a love thatknew no bounds. I even tried to forgive his faithlessness; but heunderstood nothing, nothing! How could he understand indeed? He is amonster! I only received that letter the next evening: it was brought mefrom the tavern—and only that morning, only that morning I wanted toforgive him everything, everything—even his treachery!”
The President and the prosecutor, of course, tried to calm her. I can’thelp thinking that they felt ashamed of taking advantage of her hysteriaand of listening to such avowals. I remember hearing them say to her, “Weunderstand how hard it is for you; be sure we are able to feel for you,”and so on, and so on. And yet they dragged the evidence out of the raving,hysterical woman. She described at last with extraordinary clearness,which is so often seen, though only for a moment, in such over‐wroughtstates, how Ivan had been nearly driven out of his mind during the lasttwo months trying to save “the monster and murderer,” his brother.
“He tortured himself,” she exclaimed, “he was always trying to minimizehis brother’s guilt and confessing to me that he, too, had never loved hisfather, and perhaps desired his death himself. Oh, he has a tender, over‐tender conscience! He tormented himself with his conscience! He told meeverything, everything! He came every day and talked to me as his onlyfriend. I have the honor to be his only friend!” she cried suddenly with asort of defiance, and her eyes flashed. “He had been twice to seeSmerdyakov. One day he came to me and said, ‘If it was not my brother, butSmerdyakov committed the murder’ (for the legend was circulatingeverywhere that Smerdyakov had done it), ‘perhaps I too am guilty, forSmerdyakov knew I didn’t like my father and perhaps believed that Idesired my father’s death.’ Then I brought out that letter and showed ithim. He was entirely convinced that his brother had done it, and he wasoverwhelmed by it. He couldn’t endure the thought that his own brother wasa parricide! Only a week ago I saw that it was making him ill. During thelast few days he has talked incoherently in my presence. I saw his mindwas giving way. He walked about, raving; he was seen muttering in thestreets. The doctor from Moscow, at my request, examined him the daybefore yesterday and told me that he was on the eve of brain fever—and allon his account, on account of this monster! And last night he learnt thatSmerdyakov was dead! It was such a shock that it drove him out of his mind... and all through this monster, all for the sake of saving the monster!”
Oh, of course, such an outpouring, such an avowal is only possible once ina lifetime—at the hour of death, for instance, on the way to the scaffold!But it was in Katya’s character, and it was such a moment in her life. Itwas the same impetuous Katya who had thrown herself on the mercy of ayoung profligate to save her father; the same Katya who had just before,in her pride and chastity, sacrificed herself and her maidenly modestybefore all these people, telling of Mitya’s generous conduct, in the hopeof softening his fate a little. And now, again, she sacrificed herself;but this time it was for another, and perhaps only now—perhaps only atthis moment—she felt and knew how dear that other was to her! She hadsacrificed herself in terror for him, conceiving all of a sudden that hehad ruined himself by his confession that it was he who had committed themurder, not his brother, she had sacrificed herself to save him, to savehis good name, his reputation!
And yet one terrible doubt occurred to one—was she lying in herdescription of her former relations with Mitya?—that was the question. No,she had not intentionally slandered him when she cried that Mitya despisedher for her bowing down to him! She believed it herself. She had beenfirmly convinced, perhaps ever since that bow, that the simple‐heartedMitya, who even then adored her, was laughing at her and despising her.She had loved him with an hysterical, “lacerated” love only from pride,from wounded pride, and that love was not like love, but more likerevenge. Oh! perhaps that lacerated love would have grown into real love,perhaps Katya longed for nothing more than that, but Mitya’s faithlessnesshad wounded her to the bottom of her heart, and her heart could notforgive him. The moment of revenge had come upon her suddenly, and allthat had been accumulating so long and so painfully in the offendedwoman’s breast burst out all at once and unexpectedly. She betrayed Mitya,but she betrayed herself, too. And no sooner had she given full expressionto her feelings than the tension of course was over and she wasoverwhelmed with shame. Hysterics began again: she fell on the floor,sobbing and screaming. She was carried out. At that moment Grushenka, witha wail, rushed towards Mitya before they had time to prevent her.
“Mitya,” she wailed, “your serpent has destroyed you! There, she has shownyou what she is!” she shouted to the judges, shaking with anger. At asignal from the President they seized her and tried to remove her from thecourt. She wouldn’t allow it. She fought and struggled to get back toMitya. Mitya uttered a cry and struggled to get to her. He wasoverpowered.
Yes, I think the ladies who came to see the spectacle must have beensatisfied—the show had been a varied one. Then I remember the Moscowdoctor appeared on the scene. I believe the President had previously sentthe court usher to arrange for medical aid for Ivan. The doctor announcedto the court that the sick man was suffering from a dangerous attack ofbrain fever, and that he must be at once removed. In answer to questionsfrom the prosecutor and the counsel for the defense he said that thepatient had come to him of his own accord the day before yesterday andthat he had warned him that he had such an attack coming on, but he hadnot consented to be looked after. “He was certainly not in a normal stateof mind: he told me himself that he saw visions when he was awake, that hemet several persons in the street, who were dead, and that Satan visitedhim every evening,” said the doctor, in conclusion. Having given hisevidence, the celebrated doctor withdrew. The letter produced by KaterinaIvanovna was added to the material proofs. After some deliberation, thejudges decided to proceed with the trial and to enter both the unexpectedpieces of evidence (given by Ivan and Katerina Ivanovna) on the protocol.
But I will not detail the evidence of the other witnesses, who onlyrepeated and confirmed what had been said before, though all with theircharacteristic peculiarities. I repeat, all was brought together in theprosecutor’s speech, which I shall quote immediately. Every one wasexcited, every one was electrified by the late catastrophe, and all wereawaiting the speeches for the prosecution and the defense with intenseimpatience. Fetyukovitch was obviously shaken by Katerina Ivanovna’sevidence. But the prosecutor was triumphant. When all the evidence hadbeen taken, the court was adjourned for almost an hour. I believe it wasjust eight o’clock when the President returned to his seat and ourprosecutor, Ippolit Kirillovitch, began his speech.


Chapter VI. The Prosecutor’s Speech. Sketches Of Character

Ippolit Kirillovitch began his speech, trembling with nervousness, withcold sweat on his forehead, feeling hot and cold all over by turns. Hedescribed this himself afterwards. He regarded this speech as his _chef‐d’œuvre_, the _chef‐d’œuvre_ of his whole life, as his swan‐song. He died,it is true, nine months later of rapid consumption, so that he had theright, as it turned out, to compare himself to a swan singing his lastsong. He had put his whole heart and all the brain he had into thatspeech. And poor Ippolit Kirillovitch unexpectedly revealed that at leastsome feeling for the public welfare and “the eternal question” layconcealed in him. Where his speech really excelled was in its sincerity.He genuinely believed in the prisoner’s guilt; he was accusing him not asan official duty only, and in calling for vengeance he quivered with agenuine passion “for the security of society.” Even the ladies in theaudience, though they remained hostile to Ippolit Kirillovitch, admittedthat he made an extraordinary impression on them. He began in a breakingvoice, but it soon gained strength and filled the court to the end of hisspeech. But as soon as he had finished, he almost fainted.
“Gentlemen of the jury,” began the prosecutor, “this case has made a stirthroughout Russia. But what is there to wonder at, what is there sopeculiarly horrifying in it for us? We are so accustomed to such crimes!That’s what’s so horrible, that such dark deeds have ceased to horrify us.What ought to horrify us is that we are so accustomed to it, and not thisor that isolated crime. What are the causes of our indifference, ourlukewarm attitude to such deeds, to such signs of the times, ominous of anunenviable future? Is it our cynicism, is it the premature exhaustion ofintellect and imagination in a society that is sinking into decay, inspite of its youth? Is it that our moral principles are shattered to theirfoundations, or is it, perhaps, a complete lack of such principles amongus? I cannot answer such questions; nevertheless they are disturbing, andevery citizen not only must, but ought to be harassed by them. Our newbornand still timid press has done good service to the public already, forwithout it we should never have heard of the horrors of unbridled violenceand moral degradation which are continually made known by the press, notmerely to those who attend the new jury courts established in the presentreign, but to every one. And what do we read almost daily? Of thingsbeside which the present case grows pale, and seems almost commonplace.But what is most important is that the majority of our national crimes ofviolence bear witness to a widespread evil, now so general among us thatit is difficult to contend against it.
“One day we see a brilliant young officer of high society, at the veryoutset of his career, in a cowardly underhand way, without a pang ofconscience, murdering an official who had once been his benefactor, andthe servant girl, to steal his own I.O.U. and what ready money he couldfind on him; ‘it will come in handy for my pleasures in the fashionableworld and for my career in the future.’ After murdering them, he putspillows under the head of each of his victims; he goes away. Next, a younghero ‘decorated for bravery’ kills the mother of his chief and benefactor,like a highwayman, and to urge his companions to join him he asserts that‘she loves him like a son, and so will follow all his directions and takeno precautions.’ Granted that he is a monster, yet I dare not say in thesedays that he is unique. Another man will not commit the murder, but willfeel and think like him, and is as dishonorable in soul. In silence, alonewith his conscience, he asks himself perhaps, ‘What is honor, and isn’tthe condemnation of bloodshed a prejudice?’
“Perhaps people will cry out against me that I am morbid, hysterical, thatit is a monstrous slander, that I am exaggerating. Let them say so—andheavens! I should be the first to rejoice if it were so! Oh, don’t believeme, think of me as morbid, but remember my words; if only a tenth, if onlya twentieth part of what I say is true—even so it’s awful! Look how ouryoung people commit suicide, without asking themselves Hamlet’s questionwhat there is beyond, without a sign of such a question, as though allthat relates to the soul and to what awaits us beyond the grave had longbeen erased in their minds and buried under the sands. Look at our vice,at our profligates. Fyodor Pavlovitch, the luckless victim in the presentcase, was almost an innocent babe compared with many of them. And yet weall knew him, ‘he lived among us!’...
“Yes, one day perhaps the leading intellects of Russia and of Europe willstudy the psychology of Russian crime, for the subject is worth it. Butthis study will come later, at leisure, when all the tragic topsy‐turvydomof to‐day is farther behind us, so that it’s possible to examine it withmore insight and more impartiality than I can do. Now we are eitherhorrified or pretend to be horrified, though we really gloat over thespectacle, and love strong and eccentric sensations which tickle ourcynical, pampered idleness. Or, like little children, we brush thedreadful ghosts away and hide our heads in the pillow so as to return toour sports and merriment as soon as they have vanished. But we must oneday begin life in sober earnest, we must look at ourselves as a society;it’s time we tried to grasp something of our social position, or at leastto make a beginning in that direction.
“A great writer of the last epoch, comparing Russia to a swift troikagalloping to an unknown goal, exclaims, ‘Oh, troika, birdlike troika, whoinvented thee!’ and adds, in proud ecstasy, that all the peoples of theworld stand aside respectfully to make way for the recklessly gallopingtroika to pass. That may be, they may stand aside, respectfully or no, butin my poor opinion the great writer ended his book in this way either inan access of childish and naïve optimism, or simply in fear of thecensorship of the day. For if the troika were drawn by his heroes,Sobakevitch, Nozdryov, Tchitchikov, it could reach no rational goal,whoever might be driving it. And those were the heroes of an oldergeneration, ours are worse specimens still....”
At this point Ippolit Kirillovitch’s speech was interrupted by applause.The liberal significance of this simile was appreciated. The applause was,it’s true, of brief duration, so that the President did not think itnecessary to caution the public, and only looked severely in the directionof the offenders. But Ippolit Kirillovitch was encouraged; he had neverbeen applauded before! He had been all his life unable to get a hearing,and now he suddenly had an opportunity of securing the ear of all Russia.
“What, after all, is this Karamazov family, which has gained such anunenviable notoriety throughout Russia?” he continued. “Perhaps I amexaggerating, but it seems to me that certain fundamental features of theeducated class of to‐day are reflected in this family picture—only, ofcourse, in miniature, ‘like the sun in a drop of water.’ Think of thatunhappy, vicious, unbridled old man, who has met with such a melancholyend, the head of a family! Beginning life of noble birth, but in a poordependent position, through an unexpected marriage he came into a smallfortune. A petty knave, a toady and buffoon, of fairly good, thoughundeveloped, intelligence, he was, above all, a moneylender, who grewbolder with growing prosperity. His abject and servile characteristicsdisappeared, his malicious and sarcastic cynicism was all that remained.On the spiritual side he was undeveloped, while his vitality wasexcessive. He saw nothing in life but sensual pleasure, and he brought hischildren up to be the same. He had no feelings for his duties as a father.He ridiculed those duties. He left his little children to the servants,and was glad to be rid of them, forgot about them completely. The oldman’s maxim was _Après moi le déluge_. He was an example of everythingthat is opposed to civic duty, of the most complete and malignantindividualism. ‘The world may burn for aught I care, so long as I am allright,’ and he was all right; he was content, he was eager to go on livingin the same way for another twenty or thirty years. He swindled his ownson and spent his money, his maternal inheritance, on trying to get hismistress from him. No, I don’t intend to leave the prisoner’s defensealtogether to my talented colleague from Petersburg. I will speak thetruth myself, I can well understand what resentment he had heaped up inhis son’s heart against him.
“But enough, enough of that unhappy old man; he has paid the penalty. Letus remember, however, that he was a father, and one of the typical fathersof to‐day. Am I unjust, indeed, in saying that he is typical of manymodern fathers? Alas! many of them only differ in not openly professingsuch cynicism, for they are better educated, more cultured, but theirphilosophy is essentially the same as his. Perhaps I am a pessimist, butyou have agreed to forgive me. Let us agree beforehand, you need notbelieve me, but let me speak. Let me say what I have to say, and remembersomething of my words.
“Now for the children of this father, this head of a family. One of themis the prisoner before us, all the rest of my speech will deal with him.Of the other two I will speak only cursorily.
“The elder is one of those modern young men of brilliant education andvigorous intellect, who has lost all faith in everything. He has deniedand rejected much already, like his father. We have all heard him, he wasa welcome guest in local society. He never concealed his opinions, quitethe contrary in fact, which justifies me in speaking rather openly of himnow, of course, not as an individual, but as a member of the Karamazovfamily. Another personage closely connected with the case died here by hisown hand last night. I mean an afflicted idiot, formerly the servant, andpossibly the illegitimate son, of Fyodor Pavlovitch, Smerdyakov. At thepreliminary inquiry, he told me with hysterical tears how the young IvanKaramazov had horrified him by his spiritual audacity. ‘Everything in theworld is lawful according to him, and nothing must be forbidden in thefuture—that is what he always taught me.’ I believe that idiot was drivenout of his mind by this theory, though, of course, the epileptic attacksfrom which he suffered, and this terrible catastrophe, have helped tounhinge his faculties. But he dropped one very interesting observation,which would have done credit to a more intelligent observer, and that is,indeed, why I’ve mentioned it: ‘If there is one of the sons that is likeFyodor Pavlovitch in character, it is Ivan Fyodorovitch.’
“With that remark I conclude my sketch of his character, feeling itindelicate to continue further. Oh, I don’t want to draw any furtherconclusions and croak like a raven over the young man’s future. We’ve seento‐day in this court that there are still good impulses in his youngheart, that family feeling has not been destroyed in him by lack of faithand cynicism, which have come to him rather by inheritance than by theexercise of independent thought.
“Then the third son. Oh, he is a devout and modest youth, who does notshare his elder brother’s gloomy and destructive theory of life. He hassought to cling to the ‘ideas of the people,’ or to what goes by that namein some circles of our intellectual classes. He clung to the monastery,and was within an ace of becoming a monk. He seems to me to have betrayedunconsciously, and so early, that timid despair which leads so many in ourunhappy society, who dread cynicism and its corrupting influences, andmistakenly attribute all the mischief to European enlightenment, to returnto their ‘native soil,’ as they say, to the bosom, so to speak, of theirmother earth, like frightened children, yearning to fall asleep on thewithered bosom of their decrepit mother, and to sleep there for ever, onlyto escape the horrors that terrify them.
“For my part I wish the excellent and gifted young man every success; Itrust that his youthful idealism and impulse towards the ideas of thepeople may never degenerate, as often happens, on the moral side intogloomy mysticism, and on the political into blind chauvinism—two elementswhich are even a greater menace to Russia than the premature decay, due tomisunderstanding and gratuitous adoption of European ideas, from which hiselder brother is suffering.”
Two or three people clapped their hands at the mention of chauvinism andmysticism. Ippolit Kirillovitch had been, indeed, carried away by his owneloquence. All this had little to do with the case in hand, to say nothingof the fact of its being somewhat vague, but the sickly and consumptiveman was overcome by the desire to express himself once in his life. Peoplesaid afterwards that he was actuated by unworthy motives in his criticismof Ivan, because the latter had on one or two occasions got the better ofhim in argument, and Ippolit Kirillovitch, remembering it, tried now totake his revenge. But I don’t know whether it was true. All this was onlyintroductory, however, and the speech passed to more direct considerationof the case.
“But to return to the eldest son,” Ippolit Kirillovitch went on. “He isthe prisoner before us. We have his life and his actions, too, before us;the fatal day has come and all has been brought to the surface. While hisbrothers seem to stand for ‘Europeanism’ and ‘the principles of thepeople,’ he seems to represent Russia as she is. Oh, not all Russia, notall! God preserve us, if it were! Yet, here we have her, our motherRussia, the very scent and sound of her. Oh, he is spontaneous, he is amarvelous mingling of good and evil, he is a lover of culture andSchiller, yet he brawls in taverns and plucks out the beards of his booncompanions. Oh, he, too, can be good and noble, but only when all goeswell with him. What is more, he can be carried off his feet, positivelycarried off his feet by noble ideals, but only if they come of themselves,if they fall from heaven for him, if they need not be paid for. Hedislikes paying for anything, but is very fond of receiving, and that’s sowith him in everything. Oh, give him every possible good in life (hecouldn’t be content with less), and put no obstacle in his way, and hewill show that he, too, can be noble. He is not greedy, no, but he musthave money, a great deal of money, and you will see how generously, withwhat scorn of filthy lucre, he will fling it all away in the recklessdissipation of one night. But if he has not money, he will show what he isready to do to get it when he is in great need of it. But all this later,let us take events in their chronological order.
“First, we have before us a poor abandoned child, running about the back‐yard ‘without boots on his feet,’ as our worthy and esteemed fellowcitizen, of foreign origin, alas! expressed it just now. I repeat itagain, I yield to no one the defense of the criminal. I am here to accusehim, but to defend him also. Yes, I, too, am human; I, too, can weigh theinfluence of home and childhood on the character. But the boy grows up andbecomes an officer; for a duel and other reckless conduct he is exiled toone of the remote frontier towns of Russia. There he led a wild life as anofficer. And, of course, he needed money, money before all things, and soafter prolonged disputes he came to a settlement with his father, and thelast six thousand was sent him. A letter is in existence in which hepractically gives up his claim to the rest and settles his conflict withhis father over the inheritance on the payment of this six thousand.
“Then came his meeting with a young girl of lofty character and brillianteducation. Oh, I do not venture to repeat the details; you have only justheard them. Honor, self‐sacrifice were shown there, and I will be silent.The figure of the young officer, frivolous and profligate, doing homage totrue nobility and a lofty ideal, was shown in a very sympathetic lightbefore us. But the other side of the medal was unexpectedly turned to usimmediately after in this very court. Again I will not venture toconjecture why it happened so, but there were causes. The same lady,bathed in tears of long‐concealed indignation, alleged that he, he of allmen, had despised her for her action, which, though incautious, recklessperhaps, was still dictated by lofty and generous motives. He, he, thegirl’s betrothed, looked at her with that smile of mockery, which was moreinsufferable from him than from any one. And knowing that he had alreadydeceived her (he had deceived her, believing that she was bound to endureeverything from him, even treachery), she intentionally offered him threethousand roubles, and clearly, too clearly, let him understand that shewas offering him money to deceive her. ‘Well, will you take it or not, areyou so lost to shame?’ was the dumb question in her scrutinizing eyes. Helooked at her, saw clearly what was in her mind (he’s admitted here beforeyou that he understood it all), appropriated that three thousandunconditionally, and squandered it in two days with the new object of hisaffections.
“What are we to believe then? The first legend of the young officersacrificing his last farthing in a noble impulse of generosity and doingreverence to virtue, or this other revolting picture? As a rule, betweentwo extremes one has to find the mean, but in the present case this is nottrue. The probability is that in the first case he was genuinely noble,and in the second as genuinely base. And why? Because he was of the broadKaramazov character—that’s just what I am leading up to—capable ofcombining the most incongruous contradictions, and capable of the greatestheights and of the greatest depths. Remember the brilliant remark made bya young observer who has seen the Karamazov family at close quarters—Mr.Rakitin: ‘The sense of their own degradation is as essential to thosereckless, unbridled natures as the sense of their lofty generosity.’ Andthat’s true, they need continually this unnatural mixture. Two extremes atthe same moment, or they are miserable and dissatisfied and theirexistence is incomplete. They are wide, wide as mother Russia; theyinclude everything and put up with everything.
“By the way, gentlemen of the jury, we’ve just touched upon that threethousand roubles, and I will venture to anticipate things a little. Canyou conceive that a man like that, on receiving that sum and in such away, at the price of such shame, such disgrace, such utter degradation,could have been capable that very day of setting apart half that sum, thatvery day, and sewing it up in a little bag, and would have had thefirmness of character to carry it about with him for a whole monthafterwards, in spite of every temptation and his extreme need of it!Neither in drunken debauchery in taverns, nor when he was flying into thecountry, trying to get from God knows whom, the money so essential to himto remove the object of his affections from being tempted by his father,did he bring himself to touch that little bag! Why, if only to avoidabandoning his mistress to the rival of whom he was so jealous, he wouldhave been certain to have opened that bag and to have stayed at home tokeep watch over her, and to await the moment when she would say to him atlast ‘I am yours,’ and to fly with her far from their fatal surroundings.
“But no, he did not touch his talisman, and what is the reason he givesfor it? The chief reason, as I have just said, was that when she wouldsay, ‘I am yours, take me where you will,’ he might have the wherewithalto take her. But that first reason, in the prisoner’s own words, was oflittle weight beside the second. While I have that money on me, he said, Iam a scoundrel, not a thief, for I can always go to my insulted betrothed,and, laying down half the sum I have fraudulently appropriated, I canalways say to her, ‘You see, I’ve squandered half your money, and shown Iam a weak and immoral man, and, if you like, a scoundrel’ (I use theprisoner’s own expressions), ‘but though I am a scoundrel, I am not athief, for if I had been a thief, I shouldn’t have brought you back thishalf of the money, but should have taken it as I did the other half!’ Amarvelous explanation! This frantic, but weak man, who could not resistthe temptation of accepting the three thousand roubles at the price ofsuch disgrace, this very man suddenly develops the most stoical firmness,and carries about a thousand roubles without daring to touch it. Does thatfit in at all with the character we have analyzed? No, and I venture totell you how the real Dmitri Karamazov would have behaved in suchcircumstances, if he really had brought himself to put away the money.
“At the first temptation—for instance, to entertain the woman with whom hehad already squandered half the money—he would have unpicked his littlebag and have taken out some hundred roubles, for why should he have takenback precisely half the money, that is, fifteen hundred roubles? why notfourteen hundred? He could just as well have said then that he was not athief, because he brought back fourteen hundred roubles. Then another timehe would have unpicked it again and taken out another hundred, and then athird, and then a fourth, and before the end of the month he would havetaken the last note but one, feeling that if he took back only a hundredit would answer the purpose, for a thief would have stolen it all. Andthen he would have looked at this last note, and have said to himself,‘It’s really not worth while to give back one hundred; let’s spend that,too!’ That’s how the real Dmitri Karamazov, as we know him, would havebehaved. One cannot imagine anything more incongruous with the actual factthan this legend of the little bag. Nothing could be more inconceivable.But we shall return to that later.”
After touching upon what had come out in the proceedings concerning thefinancial relations of father and son, and arguing again and again that itwas utterly impossible, from the facts known, to determine which was inthe wrong, Ippolit Kirillovitch passed to the evidence of the medicalexperts in reference to Mitya’s fixed idea about the three thousand owinghim.


Chapter VII. An Historical Survey

“The medical experts have striven to convince us that the prisoner is outof his mind and, in fact, a maniac. I maintain that he is in his rightmind, and that if he had not been, he would have behaved more cleverly. Asfor his being a maniac, that I would agree with, but only in one point,that is, his fixed idea about the three thousand. Yet I think one mightfind a much simpler cause than his tendency to insanity. For my part Iagree thoroughly with the young doctor who maintained that the prisoner’smental faculties have always been normal, and that he has only beenirritable and exasperated. The object of the prisoner’s continual andviolent anger was not the sum itself; there was a special motive at thebottom of it. That motive is jealousy!”
Here Ippolit Kirillovitch described at length the prisoner’s fatal passionfor Grushenka. He began from the moment when the prisoner went to the“young person’s” lodgings “to beat her”—“I use his own expression,” theprosecutor explained—“but instead of beating her, he remained there, ather feet. That was the beginning of the passion. At the same time theprisoner’s father was captivated by the same young person—a strange andfatal coincidence, for they both lost their hearts to her simultaneously,though both had known her before. And she inspired in both of them themost violent, characteristically Karamazov passion. We have her ownconfession: ‘I was laughing at both of them.’ Yes, the sudden desire tomake a jest of them came over her, and she conquered both of them at once.The old man, who worshiped money, at once set aside three thousand roublesas a reward for one visit from her, but soon after that, he would havebeen happy to lay his property and his name at her feet, if only she wouldbecome his lawful wife. We have good evidence of this. As for theprisoner, the tragedy of his fate is evident; it is before us. But suchwas the young person’s ‘game.’ The enchantress gave the unhappy young manno hope until the last moment, when he knelt before her, stretching outhands that were already stained with the blood of his father and rival. Itwas in that position that he was arrested. ‘Send me to Siberia with him, Ihave brought him to this, I am most to blame,’ the woman herself cried, ingenuine remorse at the moment of his arrest.
“The talented young man, to whom I have referred already, Mr. Rakitin,characterized this heroine in brief and impressive terms: ‘She wasdisillusioned early in life, deceived and ruined by a betrothed, whoseduced and abandoned her. She was left in poverty, cursed by herrespectable family, and taken under the protection of a wealthy old man,whom she still, however, considers as her benefactor. There was perhapsmuch that was good in her young heart, but it was embittered too early.She became prudent and saved money. She grew sarcastic and resentfulagainst society.’ After this sketch of her character it may well beunderstood that she might laugh at both of them simply from mischief, frommalice.
“After a month of hopeless love and moral degradation, during which hebetrayed his betrothed and appropriated money entrusted to his honor, theprisoner was driven almost to frenzy, almost to madness by continualjealousy—and of whom? His father! And the worst of it was that the crazyold man was alluring and enticing the object of his affection by means ofthat very three thousand roubles, which the son looked upon as his ownproperty, part of his inheritance from his mother, of which his father wascheating him. Yes, I admit it was hard to bear! It might well drive a manto madness. It was not the money, but the fact that this money was usedwith such revolting cynicism to ruin his happiness!”
Then the prosecutor went on to describe how the idea of murdering hisfather had entered the prisoner’s head, and illustrated his theory withfacts.
“At first he only talked about it in taverns—he was talking about it allthat month. Ah, he likes being always surrounded with company, and helikes to tell his companions everything, even his most diabolical anddangerous ideas; he likes to share every thought with others, and expects,for some reason, that those he confides in will meet him with perfectsympathy, enter into all his troubles and anxieties, take his part and notoppose him in anything. If not, he flies into a rage and smashes upeverything in the tavern. [Then followed the anecdote about CaptainSnegiryov.] Those who heard the prisoner began to think at last that hemight mean more than threats, and that such a frenzy might turn threatsinto actions.”
Here the prosecutor described the meeting of the family at the monastery,the conversations with Alyosha, and the horrible scene of violence whenthe prisoner had rushed into his father’s house just after dinner.
“I cannot positively assert,” the prosecutor continued, “that the prisonerfully intended to murder his father before that incident. Yet the idea hadseveral times presented itself to him, and he had deliberated on it—forthat we have facts, witnesses, and his own words. I confess, gentlemen ofthe jury,” he added, “that till to‐day I have been uncertain whether toattribute to the prisoner conscious premeditation. I was firmly convincedthat he had pictured the fatal moment beforehand, but had only picturedit, contemplating it as a possibility. He had not definitely consideredwhen and how he might commit the crime.
“But I was only uncertain till to‐day, till that fatal document waspresented to the court just now. You yourselves heard that young lady’sexclamation, ‘It is the plan, the program of the murder!’ That is how shedefined that miserable, drunken letter of the unhappy prisoner. And, infact, from that letter we see that the whole fact of the murder waspremeditated. It was written two days before, and so we know now for afact that, forty‐eight hours before the perpetration of his terribledesign, the prisoner swore that, if he could not get money next day, hewould murder his father in order to take the envelope with the notes fromunder his pillow, as soon as Ivan had left. ‘As soon as Ivan had goneaway’—you hear that; so he had thought everything out, weighing everycircumstance, and he carried it all out just as he had written it. Theproof of premeditation is conclusive; the crime must have been committedfor the sake of the money, that is stated clearly, that is written andsigned. The prisoner does not deny his signature.
“I shall be told he was drunk when he wrote it. But that does not diminishthe value of the letter, quite the contrary; he wrote when drunk what hehad planned when sober. Had he not planned it when sober, he would nothave written it when drunk. I shall be asked: Then why did he talk aboutit in taverns? A man who premeditates such a crime is silent and keeps itto himself. Yes, but he talked about it before he had formed a plan, whenhe had only the desire, only the impulse to it. Afterwards he talked lessabout it. On the evening he wrote that letter at the ‘Metropolis’ tavern,contrary to his custom he was silent, though he had been drinking. He didnot play billiards, he sat in a corner, talked to no one. He did indeedturn a shopman out of his seat, but that was done almost unconsciously,because he could never enter a tavern without making a disturbance. It istrue that after he had taken the final decision, he must have feltapprehensive that he had talked too much about his design beforehand, andthat this might lead to his arrest and prosecution afterwards. But therewas nothing for it; he could not take his words back, but his luck hadserved him before, it would serve him again. He believed in his star, youknow! I must confess, too, that he did a great deal to avoid the fatalcatastrophe. ‘To‐morrow I shall try and borrow the money from every one,’as he writes in his peculiar language, ‘and if they won’t give it to me,there will be bloodshed.’ ”
Here Ippolit Kirillovitch passed to a detailed description of all Mitya’sefforts to borrow the money. He described his visit to Samsonov, hisjourney to Lyagavy. “Harassed, jeered at, hungry, after selling his watchto pay for the journey (though he tells us he had fifteen hundred roubleson him—a likely story), tortured by jealousy at having left the object ofhis affections in the town, suspecting that she would go to FyodorPavlovitch in his absence, he returned at last to the town, to find, tohis joy, that she had not been near his father. He accompanied her himselfto her protector. (Strange to say, he doesn’t seem to have been jealous ofSamsonov, which is psychologically interesting.) Then he hastens back tohis ambush in the back gardens, and there learns that Smerdyakov is in afit, that the other servant is ill—the coast is clear and he knows the‘signals’—what a temptation! Still he resists it; he goes off to a ladywho has for some time been residing in the town, and who is highlyesteemed among us, Madame Hohlakov. That lady, who had long watched hiscareer with compassion, gave him the most judicious advice, to give up hisdissipated life, his unseemly love‐affair, the waste of his youth andvigor in pot‐house debauchery, and to set off to Siberia to the gold‐mines: ‘that would be an outlet for your turbulent energies, your romanticcharacter, your thirst for adventure.’ ”
After describing the result of this conversation and the moment when theprisoner learnt that Grushenka had not remained at Samsonov’s, the suddenfrenzy of the luckless man worn out with jealousy and nervous exhaustion,at the thought that she had deceived him and was now with his father,Ippolit Kirillovitch concluded by dwelling upon the fatal influence ofchance. “Had the maid told him that her mistress was at Mokroe with herformer lover, nothing would have happened. But she lost her head, shecould only swear and protest her ignorance, and if the prisoner did notkill her on the spot, it was only because he flew in pursuit of his falsemistress.
“But note, frantic as he was, he took with him a brass pestle. Why that?Why not some other weapon? But since he had been contemplating his planand preparing himself for it for a whole month, he would snatch upanything like a weapon that caught his eye. He had realized for a monthpast that any object of the kind would serve as a weapon, so he instantly,without hesitation, recognized that it would serve his purpose. So it wasby no means unconsciously, by no means involuntarily, that he snatched upthat fatal pestle. And then we find him in his father’s garden—the coastis clear, there are no witnesses, darkness and jealousy. The suspicionthat she was there, with him, with his rival, in his arms, and perhapslaughing at him at that moment—took his breath away. And it was not meresuspicion, the deception was open, obvious. She must be there, in thatlighted room, she must be behind the screen; and the unhappy man wouldhave us believe that he stole up to the window, peeped respectfully in,and discreetly withdrew, for fear something terrible and immoral shouldhappen. And he tries to persuade us of that, us, who understand hischaracter, who know his state of mind at the moment, and that he knew thesignals by which he could at once enter the house.” At this point IppolitKirillovitch broke off to discuss exhaustively the suspected connection ofSmerdyakov with the murder. He did this very circumstantially, and everyone realized that, although he professed to despise that suspicion, hethought the subject of great importance.


Chapter VIII. A Treatise On Smerdyakov

“To begin with, what was the source of this suspicion?” (IppolitKirillovitch began.) “The first person who cried out that Smerdyakov hadcommitted the murder was the prisoner himself at the moment of his arrest,yet from that time to this he had not brought forward a single fact toconfirm the charge, nor the faintest suggestion of a fact. The charge isconfirmed by three persons only—the two brothers of the prisoner andMadame Svyetlov. The elder of these brothers expressed his suspicions onlyto‐day, when he was undoubtedly suffering from brain fever. But we knowthat for the last two months he has completely shared our conviction ofhis brother’s guilt and did not attempt to combat that idea. But of thatlater. The younger brother has admitted that he has not the slightest factto support his notion of Smerdyakov’s guilt, and has only been led to thatconclusion from the prisoner’s own words and the expression of his face.Yes, that astounding piece of evidence has been brought forward twice to‐day by him. Madame Svyetlov was even more astounding. ‘What the prisonertells you, you must believe; he is not a man to tell a lie.’ That is allthe evidence against Smerdyakov produced by these three persons, who areall deeply concerned in the prisoner’s fate. And yet the theory ofSmerdyakov’s guilt has been noised about, has been and is stillmaintained. Is it credible? Is it conceivable?”
Here Ippolit Kirillovitch thought it necessary to describe the personalityof Smerdyakov, “who had cut short his life in a fit of insanity.” Hedepicted him as a man of weak intellect, with a smattering of education,who had been thrown off his balance by philosophical ideas above his leveland certain modern theories of duty, which he learnt in practice from thereckless life of his master, who was also perhaps his father—FyodorPavlovitch; and, theoretically, from various strange philosophicalconversations with his master’s elder son, Ivan Fyodorovitch, who readilyindulged in this diversion, probably feeling dull or wishing to amusehimself at the valet’s expense. “He spoke to me himself of his spiritualcondition during the last few days at his father’s house,” IppolitKirillovitch explained; “but others too have borne witness to it—theprisoner himself, his brother, and the servant Grigory—that is, all whoknew him well.
“Moreover, Smerdyakov, whose health was shaken by his attacks of epilepsy,had not the courage of a chicken. ‘He fell at my feet and kissed them,’the prisoner himself has told us, before he realized how damaging such astatement was to himself. ‘He is an epileptic chicken,’ he declared abouthim in his characteristic language. And the prisoner chose him for hisconfidant (we have his own word for it) and he frightened him intoconsenting at last to act as a spy for him. In that capacity he deceivedhis master, revealing to the prisoner the existence of the envelope withthe notes in it and the signals by means of which he could get into thehouse. How could he help telling him, indeed? ‘He would have killed me, Icould see that he would have killed me,’ he said at the inquiry, tremblingand shaking even before us, though his tormentor was by that time arrestedand could do him no harm. ‘He suspected me at every instant. In fear andtrembling I hastened to tell him every secret to pacify him, that he mightsee that I had not deceived him and let me off alive.’ Those are his ownwords. I wrote them down and I remember them. ‘When he began shouting atme, I would fall on my knees.’
“He was naturally very honest and enjoyed the complete confidence of hismaster, ever since he had restored him some money he had lost. So it maybe supposed that the poor fellow suffered pangs of remorse at havingdeceived his master, whom he loved as his benefactor. Persons severelyafflicted with epilepsy are, so the most skillful doctors tell us, alwaysprone to continual and morbid self‐reproach. They worry over their‘wickedness,’ they are tormented by pangs of conscience, often entirelywithout cause; they exaggerate and often invent all sorts of faults andcrimes. And here we have a man of that type who had really been driven towrong‐doing by terror and intimidation.
“He had, besides, a strong presentiment that something terrible would bethe outcome of the situation that was developing before his eyes. WhenIvan Fyodorovitch was leaving for Moscow, just before the catastrophe,Smerdyakov besought him to remain, though he was too timid to tell himplainly what he feared. He confined himself to hints, but his hints werenot understood.
“It must be observed that he looked on Ivan Fyodorovitch as a protector,whose presence in the house was a guarantee that no harm would come topass. Remember the phrase in Dmitri Karamazov’s drunken letter, ‘I shallkill the old man, if only Ivan goes away.’ So Ivan Fyodorovitch’s presenceseemed to every one a guarantee of peace and order in the house.
“But he went away, and within an hour of his young master’s departureSmerdyakov was taken with an epileptic fit. But that’s perfectlyintelligible. Here I must mention that Smerdyakov, oppressed by terror anddespair of a sort, had felt during those last few days that one of thefits from which he had suffered before at moments of strain, might becoming upon him again. The day and hour of such an attack cannot, ofcourse, be foreseen, but every epileptic can feel beforehand that he islikely to have one. So the doctors tell us. And so, as soon as IvanFyodorovitch had driven out of the yard, Smerdyakov, depressed by hislonely and unprotected position, went to the cellar. He went down thestairs wondering if he would have a fit or not, and what if it were tocome upon him at once. And that very apprehension, that very wonder,brought on the spasm in his throat that always precedes such attacks, andhe fell unconscious into the cellar. And in this perfectly naturaloccurrence people try to detect a suspicion, a hint that he was shammingan attack _on purpose_. But, if it were on purpose, the question arises atonce, what was his motive? What was he reckoning on? What was he aimingat? I say nothing about medicine: science, I am told, may go astray: thedoctors were not able to discriminate between the counterfeit and thereal. That may be so, but answer me one question: what motive had he forsuch a counterfeit? Could he, had he been plotting the murder, havedesired to attract the attention of the household by having a fit justbefore?
“You see, gentlemen of the jury, on the night of the murder, there werefive persons in Fyodor Pavlovitch’s—Fyodor Pavlovitch himself (but he didnot kill himself, that’s evident); then his servant, Grigory, but he wasalmost killed himself; the third person was Grigory’s wife, MarfaIgnatyevna, but it would be simply shameful to imagine her murdering hermaster. Two persons are left—the prisoner and Smerdyakov. But, if we areto believe the prisoner’s statement that he is not the murderer, thenSmerdyakov must have been, for there is no other alternative, no one elsecan be found. That is what accounts for the artful, astounding accusationagainst the unhappy idiot who committed suicide yesterday. Had a shadow ofsuspicion rested on any one else, had there been any sixth person, I ampersuaded that even the prisoner would have been ashamed to accuseSmerdyakov, and would have accused that sixth person, for to chargeSmerdyakov with that murder is perfectly absurd.
“Gentlemen, let us lay aside psychology, let us lay aside medicine, let useven lay aside logic, let us turn only to the facts and see what the factstell us. If Smerdyakov killed him, how did he do it? Alone or with theassistance of the prisoner? Let us consider the first alternative—that hedid it alone. If he had killed him it must have been with some object, forsome advantage to himself. But not having a shadow of the motive that theprisoner had for the murder—hatred, jealousy, and so on—Smerdyakov couldonly have murdered him for the sake of gain, in order to appropriate thethree thousand roubles he had seen his master put in the envelope. And yethe tells another person—and a person most closely interested, that is, theprisoner—everything about the money and the signals, where the envelopelay, what was written on it, what it was tied up with, and, above all,told him of those signals by which he could enter the house. Did he dothis simply to betray himself, or to invite to the same enterprise one whowould be anxious to get that envelope for himself? ‘Yes,’ I shall be told,‘but he betrayed it from fear.’ But how do you explain this? A man whocould conceive such an audacious, savage act, and carry it out, tellsfacts which are known to no one else in the world, and which, if he heldhis tongue, no one would ever have guessed!
“No, however cowardly he might be, if he had plotted such a crime, nothingwould have induced him to tell any one about the envelope and the signals,for that was as good as betraying himself beforehand. He would haveinvented something, he would have told some lie if he had been forced togive information, but he would have been silent about that. For, on theother hand, if he had said nothing about the money, but had committed themurder and stolen the money, no one in the world could have charged himwith murder for the sake of robbery, since no one but he had seen themoney, no one but he knew of its existence in the house. Even if he hadbeen accused of the murder, it could only have been thought that he hadcommitted it from some other motive. But since no one had observed anysuch motive in him beforehand, and every one saw, on the contrary, thathis master was fond of him and honored him with his confidence, he would,of course, have been the last to be suspected. People would have suspectedfirst the man who had a motive, a man who had himself declared he had suchmotives, who had made no secret of it; they would, in fact, have suspectedthe son of the murdered man, Dmitri Fyodorovitch. Had Smerdyakov killedand robbed him, and the son been accused of it, that would, of course,have suited Smerdyakov. Yet are we to believe that, though plotting themurder, he told that son, Dmitri, about the money, the envelope, and thesignals? Is that logical? Is that clear?
“When the day of the murder planned by Smerdyakov came, we have himfalling downstairs in a _feigned_ fit—with what object? In the first placethat Grigory, who had been intending to take his medicine, might put itoff and remain on guard, seeing there was no one to look after the house,and, in the second place, I suppose, that his master seeing that there wasno one to guard him, and in terror of a visit from his son, might redoublehis vigilance and precaution. And, most of all, I suppose that he,Smerdyakov, disabled by the fit, might be carried from the kitchen, wherehe always slept, apart from all the rest, and where he could go in and outas he liked, to Grigory’s room at the other end of the lodge, where he wasalways put, shut off by a screen three paces from their own bed. This wasthe immemorial custom established by his master and the kind‐hearted MarfaIgnatyevna, whenever he had a fit. There, lying behind the screen, hewould most likely, to keep up the sham, have begun groaning, and sokeeping them awake all night (as Grigory and his wife testified). And allthis, we are to believe, that he might more conveniently get up and murderhis master!
“But I shall be told that he shammed illness on purpose that he might notbe suspected and that he told the prisoner of the money and the signals totempt him to commit the murder, and when he had murdered him and had goneaway with the money, making a noise, most likely, and waking people,Smerdyakov got up, am I to believe, and went in—what for? To murder hismaster a second time and carry off the money that had already been stolen?Gentlemen, are you laughing? I am ashamed to put forward such suggestions,but, incredible as it seems, that’s just what the prisoner alleges. Whenhe had left the house, had knocked Grigory down and raised an alarm, hetells us Smerdyakov got up, went in and murdered his master and stole themoney! I won’t press the point that Smerdyakov could hardly have reckonedon this beforehand, and have foreseen that the furious and exasperated sonwould simply come to peep in respectfully, though he knew the signals, andbeat a retreat, leaving Smerdyakov his booty. Gentlemen of the jury, I putthis question to you in earnest; when was the moment when Smerdyakov couldhave committed his crime? Name that moment, or you can’t accuse him.
“But, perhaps, the fit was a real one, the sick man suddenly recovered,heard a shout, and went out. Well—what then? He looked about him and said,‘Why not go and kill the master?’ And how did he know what had happened,since he had been lying unconscious till that moment? But there’s a limitto these flights of fancy.
“ ‘Quite so,’ some astute people will tell me, ‘but what if they were inagreement? What if they murdered him together and shared the money—whatthen?’ A weighty question, truly! And the facts to confirm it areastounding. One commits the murder and takes all the trouble while hisaccomplice lies on one side shamming a fit, apparently to arouse suspicionin every one, alarm in his master and alarm in Grigory. It would beinteresting to know what motives could have induced the two accomplices toform such an insane plan.
“But perhaps it was not a case of active complicity on Smerdyakov’s part,but only of passive acquiescence; perhaps Smerdyakov was intimidated andagreed not to prevent the murder, and foreseeing that he would be blamedfor letting his master be murdered, without screaming for help orresisting, he may have obtained permission from Dmitri Karamazov to getout of the way by shamming a fit—‘you may murder him as you like; it’snothing to me.’ But as this attack of Smerdyakov’s was bound to throw thehousehold into confusion, Dmitri Karamazov could never have agreed to sucha plan. I will waive that point however. Supposing that he did agree, itwould still follow that Dmitri Karamazov is the murderer and theinstigator, and Smerdyakov is only a passive accomplice, and not even anaccomplice, but merely acquiesced against his will through terror.
“But what do we see? As soon as he is arrested the prisoner instantlythrows all the blame on Smerdyakov, not accusing him of being hisaccomplice, but of being himself the murderer. ‘He did it alone,’ he says.‘He murdered and robbed him. It was the work of his hands.’ Strange sortof accomplices who begin to accuse one another at once! And think of therisk for Karamazov. After committing the murder while his accomplice layin bed, he throws the blame on the invalid, who might well have resentedit and in self‐preservation might well have confessed the truth. For hemight well have seen that the court would at once judge how far he wasresponsible, and so he might well have reckoned that if he were punished,it would be far less severely than the real murderer. But in that case hewould have been certain to make a confession, yet he has not done so.Smerdyakov never hinted at their complicity, though the actual murdererpersisted in accusing him and declaring that he had committed the crimealone.
“What’s more, Smerdyakov at the inquiry volunteered the statement that itwas _he_ who had told the prisoner of the envelope of notes and of thesignals, and that, but for him, he would have known nothing about them. Ifhe had really been a guilty accomplice, would he so readily have made thisstatement at the inquiry? On the contrary, he would have tried to concealit, to distort the facts or minimize them. But he was far from distortingor minimizing them. No one but an innocent man, who had no fear of beingcharged with complicity, could have acted as he did. And in a fit ofmelancholy arising from his disease and this catastrophe he hanged himselfyesterday. He left a note written in his peculiar language, ‘I destroymyself of my own will and inclination so as to throw no blame on any one.’What would it have cost him to add: ‘I am the murderer, not Karamazov’?But that he did not add. Did his conscience lead him to suicide and not toavowing his guilt?
“And what followed? Notes for three thousand roubles were brought into thecourt just now, and we were told that they were the same that lay in theenvelope now on the table before us, and that the witness had receivedthem from Smerdyakov the day before. But I need not recall the painfulscene, though I will make one or two comments, selecting such trivial onesas might not be obvious at first sight to every one, and so may beoverlooked. In the first place, Smerdyakov must have given back the moneyand hanged himself yesterday from remorse. And only yesterday he confessedhis guilt to Ivan Karamazov, as the latter informs us. If it were not so,indeed, why should Ivan Fyodorovitch have kept silence till now? And so,if he has confessed, then why, I ask again, did he not avow the wholetruth in the last letter he left behind, knowing that the innocentprisoner had to face this terrible ordeal the next day?
“The money alone is no proof. A week ago, quite by chance, the fact cameto the knowledge of myself and two other persons in this court that IvanFyodorovitch had sent two five per cent. coupons of five thousandeach—that is, ten thousand in all—to the chief town of the province to bechanged. I only mention this to point out that any one may have money, andthat it can’t be proved that these notes are the same as were in FyodorPavlovitch’s envelope.
“Ivan Karamazov, after receiving yesterday a communication of suchimportance from the real murderer, did not stir. Why didn’t he report itat once? Why did he put it all off till morning? I think I have a right toconjecture why. His health had been giving way for a week past: he hadadmitted to a doctor and to his most intimate friends that he wassuffering from hallucinations and seeing phantoms of the dead: he was onthe eve of the attack of brain fever by which he has been stricken downto‐day. In this condition he suddenly heard of Smerdyakov’s death, and atonce reflected, ‘The man is dead, I can throw the blame on him and save mybrother. I have money. I will take a roll of notes and say that Smerdyakovgave them me before his death.’ You will say that was dishonorable: it’sdishonorable to slander even the dead, and even to save a brother. True,but what if he slandered him unconsciously? What if, finally unhinged bythe sudden news of the valet’s death, he imagined it really was so? Yousaw the recent scene: you have seen the witness’s condition. He wasstanding up and was speaking, but where was his mind?
“Then followed the document, the prisoner’s letter written two days beforethe crime, and containing a complete program of the murder. Why, then, arewe looking for any other program? The crime was committed preciselyaccording to this program, and by no other than the writer of it. Yes,gentlemen of the jury, it went off without a hitch! He did not runrespectfully and timidly away from his father’s window, though he wasfirmly convinced that the object of his affections was with him. No, thatis absurd and unlikely! He went in and murdered him. Most likely he killedhim in anger, burning with resentment, as soon as he looked on his hatedrival. But having killed him, probably with one blow of the brass pestle,and having convinced himself, after careful search, that she was notthere, he did not, however, forget to put his hand under the pillow andtake out the envelope, the torn cover of which lies now on the tablebefore us.
“I mention this fact that you may note one, to my thinking, verycharacteristic circumstance. Had he been an experienced murderer and hadhe committed the murder for the sake of gain only, would he have left thetorn envelope on the floor as it was found, beside the corpse? Had it beenSmerdyakov, for instance, murdering his master to rob him, he would havesimply carried away the envelope with him, without troubling himself toopen it over his victim’s corpse, for he would have known for certain thatthe notes were in the envelope—they had been put in and sealed up in hispresence—and had he taken the envelope with him, no one would ever haveknown of the robbery. I ask you, gentlemen, would Smerdyakov have behavedin that way? Would he have left the envelope on the floor?
“No, this was the action of a frantic murderer, a murderer who was not athief and had never stolen before that day, who snatched the notes fromunder the pillow, not like a thief stealing them, but as though seizinghis own property from the thief who had stolen it. For that was the ideawhich had become almost an insane obsession in Dmitri Karamazov in regardto that money. And pouncing upon the envelope, which he had never seenbefore, he tore it open to make sure whether the money was in it, and ranaway with the money in his pocket, even forgetting to consider that he hadleft an astounding piece of evidence against himself in that torn envelopeon the floor. All because it was Karamazov, not Smerdyakov, he didn’tthink, he didn’t reflect, and how should he? He ran away; he heard behindhim the servant cry out; the old man caught him, stopped him and wasfelled to the ground by the brass pestle.
“The prisoner, moved by pity, leapt down to look at him. Would you believeit, he tells us that he leapt down out of pity, out of compassion, to seewhether he could do anything for him. Was that a moment to showcompassion? No; he jumped down simply to make certain whether the onlywitness of his crime were dead or alive. Any other feeling, any othermotive would be unnatural. Note that he took trouble over Grigory, wipedhis head with his handkerchief and, convincing himself he was dead, he ranto the house of his mistress, dazed and covered with blood. How was it henever thought that he was covered with blood and would be at oncedetected? But the prisoner himself assures us that he did not even noticethat he was covered with blood. That may be believed, that is verypossible, that always happens at such moments with criminals. On one pointthey will show diabolical cunning, while another will escape themaltogether. But he was thinking at that moment of one thing only—where was_she_? He wanted to find out at once where she was, so he ran to herlodging and learnt an unexpected and astounding piece of news—she had goneoff to Mokroe to meet her first lover.”


Chapter IX. The Galloping Troika. The End Of The Prosecutor’s Speech.

Ippolit Kirillovitch had chosen the historical method of exposition,beloved by all nervous orators, who find in its limitation a check ontheir own eager rhetoric. At this moment in his speech he went off into adissertation on Grushenka’s “first lover,” and brought forward severalinteresting thoughts on this theme.
“Karamazov, who had been frantically jealous of every one, collapsed, soto speak, and effaced himself at once before this first lover. What makesit all the more strange is that he seems to have hardly thought of thisformidable rival. But he had looked upon him as a remote danger, andKaramazov always lives in the present. Possibly he regarded him as afiction. But his wounded heart grasped instantly that the woman had beenconcealing this new rival and deceiving him, because he was anything but afiction to her, because he was the one hope of her life. Grasping thisinstantly, he resigned himself.
“Gentlemen of the jury, I cannot help dwelling on this unexpected trait inthe prisoner’s character. He suddenly evinces an irresistible desire forjustice, a respect for woman and a recognition of her right to love. Andall this at the very moment when he had stained his hands with hisfather’s blood for her sake! It is true that the blood he had shed wasalready crying out for vengeance, for, after having ruined his soul andhis life in this world, he was forced to ask himself at that same instantwhat he was and what he could be now to her, to that being, dearer to himthan his own soul, in comparison with that former lover who had returnedpenitent, with new love, to the woman he had once betrayed, with honorableoffers, with the promise of a reformed and happy life. And he, lucklessman, what could he give her now, what could he offer her?
“Karamazov felt all this, knew that all ways were barred to him by hiscrime and that he was a criminal under sentence, and not a man with lifebefore him! This thought crushed him. And so he instantly flew to onefrantic plan, which, to a man of Karamazov’s character, must have appearedthe one inevitable way out of his terrible position. That way out wassuicide. He ran for the pistols he had left in pledge with his friendPerhotin and on the way, as he ran, he pulled out of his pocket the money,for the sake of which he had stained his hands with his father’s gore. Oh,now he needed money more than ever. Karamazov would die, Karamazov wouldshoot himself and it should be remembered! To be sure, he was a poet andhad burnt the candle at both ends all his life. ‘To her, to her! andthere, oh, there I will give a feast to the whole world, such as never wasbefore, that will be remembered and talked of long after! In the midst ofshouts of wild merriment, reckless gypsy songs and dances I shall raisethe glass and drink to the woman I adore and her new‐found happiness! Andthen, on the spot, at her feet, I shall dash out my brains before her andpunish myself! She will remember Mitya Karamazov sometimes, she will seehow Mitya loved her, she will feel for Mitya!’
“Here we see in excess a love of effect, a romantic despair andsentimentality, and the wild recklessness of the Karamazovs. Yes, butthere is something else, gentlemen of the jury, something that cries outin the soul, throbs incessantly in the mind, and poisons the heart untodeath—that _something_ is conscience, gentlemen of the jury, its judgment,its terrible torments! The pistol will settle everything, the pistol isthe only way out! But _beyond_—I don’t know whether Karamazov wondered atthat moment ‘What lies beyond,’ and whether Karamazov could, like Hamlet,wonder ‘What lies beyond.’ No, gentlemen of the jury, they have theirHamlets, but we still have our Karamazovs!”
Here Ippolit Kirillovitch drew a minute picture of Mitya’s preparations,the scene at Perhotin’s, at the shop, with the drivers. He quoted numerouswords and actions, confirmed by witnesses, and the picture made a terribleimpression on the audience. The guilt of this harassed and desperate manstood out clear and convincing, when the facts were brought together.
“What need had he of precaution? Two or three times he almost confessed,hinted at it, all but spoke out.” (Then followed the evidence given bywitnesses.) “He even cried out to the peasant who drove him, ‘Do you know,you are driving a murderer!’ But it was impossible for him to speak out,he had to get to Mokroe and there to finish his romance. But what wasawaiting the luckless man? Almost from the first minute at Mokroe he sawthat his invincible rival was perhaps by no means so invincible, that thetoast to their new‐found happiness was not desired and would not beacceptable. But you know the facts, gentlemen of the jury, from thepreliminary inquiry. Karamazov’s triumph over his rival was complete andhis soul passed into quite a new phase, perhaps the most terrible phasethrough which his soul has passed or will pass.
“One may say with certainty, gentlemen of the jury,” the prosecutorcontinued, “that outraged nature and the criminal heart bring their ownvengeance more completely than any earthly justice. What’s more, justiceand punishment on earth positively alleviate the punishment of nature andare, indeed, essential to the soul of the criminal at such moments, as itssalvation from despair. For I cannot imagine the horror and moralsuffering of Karamazov when he learnt that she loved him, that for hissake she had rejected her first lover, that she was summoning him, Mitya,to a new life, that she was promising him happiness—and when? Wheneverything was over for him and nothing was possible!
“By the way, I will note in parenthesis a point of importance for thelight it throws on the prisoner’s position at the moment. This woman, thislove of his, had been till the last moment, till the very instant of hisarrest, a being unattainable, passionately desired by him butunattainable. Yet why did he not shoot himself then, why did he relinquishhis design and even forget where his pistol was? It was just thatpassionate desire for love and the hope of satisfying it that restrainedhim. Throughout their revels he kept close to his adored mistress, who wasat the banquet with him and was more charming and fascinating to him thanever—he did not leave her side, abasing himself in his homage before her.
“His passion might well, for a moment, stifle not only the fear of arrest,but even the torments of conscience. For a moment, oh, only for a moment!I can picture the state of mind of the criminal hopelessly enslaved bythese influences—first, the influence of drink, of noise and excitement,of the thud of the dance and the scream of the song, and of her, flushedwith wine, singing and dancing and laughing to him! Secondly, the hope inthe background that the fatal end might still be far off, that not tillnext morning, at least, they would come and take him. So he had a fewhours and that’s much, very much! In a few hours one can think of manythings. I imagine that he felt something like what criminals feel whenthey are being taken to the scaffold. They have another long, long streetto pass down and at walking pace, past thousands of people. Then therewill be a turning into another street and only at the end of that streetthe dread place of execution! I fancy that at the beginning of the journeythe condemned man, sitting on his shameful cart, must feel that he hasinfinite life still before him. The houses recede, the cart moves on—oh,that’s nothing, it’s still far to the turning into the second street andhe still looks boldly to right and to left at those thousands of callouslycurious people with their eyes fixed on him, and he still fancies that heis just such a man as they. But now the turning comes to the next street.Oh, that’s nothing, nothing, there’s still a whole street before him, andhowever many houses have been passed, he will still think there are manyleft. And so to the very end, to the very scaffold.
“This I imagine is how it was with Karamazov then. ‘They’ve not had timeyet,’ he must have thought, ‘I may still find some way out, oh, there’sstill time to make some plan of defense, and now, now—she is sofascinating!’
“His soul was full of confusion and dread, but he managed, however, to putaside half his money and hide it somewhere—I cannot otherwise explain thedisappearance of quite half of the three thousand he had just taken fromhis father’s pillow. He had been in Mokroe more than once before, he hadcaroused there for two days together already, he knew the old big housewith all its passages and outbuildings. I imagine that part of the moneywas hidden in that house, not long before the arrest, in some crevice,under some floor, in some corner, under the roof. With what object? Ishall be asked. Why, the catastrophe may take place at once, of course; hehadn’t yet considered how to meet it, he hadn’t the time, his head wasthrobbing and his heart was with _her_, but money—money was indispensablein any case! With money a man is always a man. Perhaps such foresight atsuch a moment may strike you as unnatural? But he assures us himself thata month before, at a critical and exciting moment, he had halved his moneyand sewn it up in a little bag. And though that was not true, as we shallprove directly, it shows the idea was a familiar one to Karamazov, he hadcontemplated it. What’s more, when he declared at the inquiry that he hadput fifteen hundred roubles in a bag (which never existed) he may haveinvented that little bag on the inspiration of the moment, because he hadtwo hours before divided his money and hidden half of it at Mokroe tillmorning, in case of emergency, simply not to have it on himself. Twoextremes, gentlemen of the jury, remember that Karamazov can contemplatetwo extremes and both at once.
“We have looked in the house, but we haven’t found the money. It may stillbe there or it may have disappeared next day and be in the prisoner’shands now. In any case he was at her side, on his knees before her, shewas lying on the bed, he had his hands stretched out to her and he had soentirely forgotten everything that he did not even hear the men coming toarrest him. He hadn’t time to prepare any line of defense in his mind. Hewas caught unawares and confronted with his judges, the arbiters of hisdestiny.
“Gentlemen of the jury, there are moments in the execution of our dutieswhen it is terrible for us to face a man, terrible on his account, too!The moments of contemplating that animal fear, when the criminal sees thatall is lost, but still struggles, still means to struggle, the momentswhen every instinct of self‐preservation rises up in him at once and helooks at you with questioning and suffering eyes, studies you, your face,your thoughts, uncertain on which side you will strike, and his distractedmind frames thousands of plans in an instant, but he is still afraid tospeak, afraid of giving himself away! This purgatory of the spirit, thisanimal thirst for self‐preservation, these humiliating moments of thehuman soul, are awful, and sometimes arouse horror and compassion for thecriminal even in the lawyer. And this was what we all witnessed then.
“At first he was thunderstruck and in his terror dropped some verycompromising phrases. ‘Blood! I’ve deserved it!’ But he quickly restrainedhimself. He had not prepared what he was to say, what answer he was tomake, he had nothing but a bare denial ready. ‘I am not guilty of myfather’s death.’ That was his fence for the moment and behind it he hopedto throw up a barricade of some sort. His first compromising exclamationshe hastened to explain by declaring that he was responsible for the deathof the servant Grigory only. ‘Of that bloodshed I am guilty, but who haskilled my father, gentlemen, who has killed him? Who can have killed him,_if not I_?’ Do you hear, he asked us that, us, who had come to ask himthat question! Do you hear that phrase uttered with such prematurehaste—‘if not I’—the animal cunning, the naïveté, the Karamazov impatienceof it? ‘I didn’t kill him and you mustn’t think I did! I wanted to killhim, gentlemen, I wanted to kill him,’ he hastens to admit (he was in ahurry, in a terrible hurry), ‘but still I am not guilty, it is not Imurdered him.’ He concedes to us that he wanted to murder him, as thoughto say, you can see for yourselves how truthful I am, so you’ll believeall the sooner that I didn’t murder him. Oh, in such cases the criminal isoften amazingly shallow and credulous.
“At that point one of the lawyers asked him, as it were incidentally, themost simple question, ‘Wasn’t it Smerdyakov killed him?’ Then, as weexpected, he was horribly angry at our having anticipated him and caughthim unawares, before he had time to pave the way to choose and snatch themoment when it would be most natural to bring in Smerdyakov’s name. Herushed at once to the other extreme, as he always does, and began toassure us that Smerdyakov could not have killed him, was not capable ofit. But don’t believe him, that was only his cunning; he didn’t reallygive up the idea of Smerdyakov; on the contrary, he meant to bring himforward again; for, indeed, he had no one else to bring forward, but hewould do that later, because for the moment that line was spoiled for him.He would bring him forward perhaps next day, or even a few days later,choosing an opportunity to cry out to us, ‘You know I was more skepticalabout Smerdyakov than you, you remember that yourselves, but now I amconvinced. He killed him, he must have done!’ And for the present he fallsback upon a gloomy and irritable denial. Impatience and anger promptedhim, however, to the most inept and incredible explanation of how helooked into his father’s window and how he respectfully withdrew. Theworst of it was that he was unaware of the position of affairs, of theevidence given by Grigory.
“We proceeded to search him. The search angered, but encouraged him, thewhole three thousand had not been found on him, only half of it. And nodoubt only at that moment of angry silence, the fiction of the little bagfirst occurred to him. No doubt he was conscious himself of theimprobability of the story and strove painfully to make it sound morelikely, to weave it into a romance that would sound plausible. In suchcases the first duty, the chief task of the investigating lawyers, is toprevent the criminal being prepared, to pounce upon him unexpectedly sothat he may blurt out his cherished ideas in all their simplicity,improbability and inconsistency. The criminal can only be made to speak bythe sudden and apparently incidental communication of some new fact, ofsome circumstance of great importance in the case, of which he had noprevious idea and could not have foreseen. We had such a fact inreadiness—that was Grigory’s evidence about the open door through whichthe prisoner had run out. He had completely forgotten about that door andhad not even suspected that Grigory could have seen it.
“The effect of it was amazing. He leapt up and shouted to us, ‘ThenSmerdyakov murdered him, it was Smerdyakov!’ and so betrayed the basis ofthe defense he was keeping back, and betrayed it in its most improbableshape, for Smerdyakov could only have committed the murder after he hadknocked Grigory down and run away. When we told him that Grigory saw thedoor was open before he fell down, and had heard Smerdyakov behind thescreen as he came out of his bedroom—Karamazov was positively crushed. Myesteemed and witty colleague, Nikolay Parfenovitch, told me afterwardsthat he was almost moved to tears at the sight of him. And to improvematters, the prisoner hastened to tell us about the much‐talked‐of littlebag—so be it, you shall hear this romance!
“Gentlemen of the jury, I have told you already why I consider thisromance not only an absurdity, but the most improbable invention thatcould have been brought forward in the circumstances. If one tried for abet to invent the most unlikely story, one could hardly find anything moreincredible. The worst of such stories is that the triumphant romancers canalways be put to confusion and crushed by the very details in which reallife is so rich and which these unhappy and involuntary story‐tellersneglect as insignificant trifles. Oh, they have no thought to spare forsuch details, their minds are concentrated on their grand invention as awhole, and fancy any one daring to pull them up for a trifle! But that’show they are caught. The prisoner was asked the question, ‘Where did youget the stuff for your little bag and who made it for you?’ ‘I made itmyself.’ ‘And where did you get the linen?’ The prisoner was positivelyoffended, he thought it almost insulting to ask him such a trivialquestion, and would you believe it, his resentment was genuine! But theyare all like that. ‘I tore it off my shirt.’ ‘Then we shall find thatshirt among your linen to‐morrow, with a piece torn off.’ And only fancy,gentlemen of the jury, if we really had found that torn shirt (and howcould we have failed to find it in his chest of drawers or trunk?) thatwould have been a fact, a material fact in support of his statement! Buthe was incapable of that reflection. ‘I don’t remember, it may not havebeen off my shirt, I sewed it up in one of my landlady’s caps.’ ‘What sortof a cap?’ ‘It was an old cotton rag of hers lying about.’ ‘And do youremember that clearly?’ ‘No, I don’t.’ And he was angry, very angry, andyet imagine not remembering it! At the most terrible moments of man’slife, for instance when he is being led to execution, he remembers justsuch trifles. He will forget anything but some green roof that has flashedpast him on the road, or a jackdaw on a cross—that he will remember. Heconcealed the making of that little bag from his household, he must haveremembered his humiliating fear that some one might come in and find himneedle in hand, how at the slightest sound he slipped behind the screen(there is a screen in his lodgings).
“But, gentlemen of the jury, why do I tell you all this, all thesedetails, trifles?” cried Ippolit Kirillovitch suddenly. “Just because theprisoner still persists in these absurdities to this moment. He has notexplained anything since that fatal night two months ago, he has not addedone actual illuminating fact to his former fantastic statements; all thoseare trivialities. ‘You must believe it on my honor.’ Oh, we are glad tobelieve it, we are eager to believe it, even if only on his word of honor!Are we jackals thirsting for human blood? Show us a single fact in theprisoner’s favor and we shall rejoice; but let it be a substantial, realfact, and not a conclusion drawn from the prisoner’s expression by his ownbrother, or that when he beat himself on the breast he must have meant topoint to the little bag, in the darkness, too. We shall rejoice at the newfact, we shall be the first to repudiate our charge, we shall hasten torepudiate it. But now justice cries out and we persist, we cannotrepudiate anything.”
Ippolit Kirillovitch passed to his final peroration. He looked as thoughhe was in a fever, he spoke of the blood that cried for vengeance, theblood of the father murdered by his son, with the base motive of robbery!He pointed to the tragic and glaring consistency of the facts.
“And whatever you may hear from the talented and celebrated counsel forthe defense,” Ippolit Kirillovitch could not resist adding, “whatevereloquent and touching appeals may be made to your sensibilities, rememberthat at this moment you are in a temple of justice. Remember that you arethe champions of our justice, the champions of our holy Russia, of herprinciples, her family, everything that she holds sacred! Yes, yourepresent Russia here at this moment, and your verdict will be heard notin this hall only but will reëcho throughout the whole of Russia, and allRussia will hear you, as her champions and her judges, and she will beencouraged or disheartened by your verdict. Do not disappoint Russia andher expectations. Our fatal troika dashes on in her headlong flightperhaps to destruction and in all Russia for long past men have stretchedout imploring hands and called a halt to its furious reckless course. Andif other nations stand aside from that troika that may be, not fromrespect, as the poet would fain believe, but simply from horror. Fromhorror, perhaps from disgust. And well it is that they stand aside, butmaybe they will cease one day to do so and will form a firm wallconfronting the hurrying apparition and will check the frenzied rush ofour lawlessness, for the sake of their own safety, enlightenment andcivilization. Already we have heard voices of alarm from Europe, theyalready begin to sound. Do not tempt them! Do not heap up their growinghatred by a sentence justifying the murder of a father by his son!”
Though Ippolit Kirillovitch was genuinely moved, he wound up his speechwith this rhetorical appeal—and the effect produced by him wasextraordinary. When he had finished his speech, he went out hurriedly and,as I have mentioned before, almost fainted in the adjoining room. Therewas no applause in the court, but serious persons were pleased. The ladieswere not so well satisfied, though even they were pleased with hiseloquence, especially as they had no apprehensions as to the upshot of thetrial and had full trust in Fetyukovitch. “He will speak at last and ofcourse carry all before him.”
Every one looked at Mitya; he sat silent through the whole of theprosecutor’s speech, clenching his teeth, with his hands clasped, and hishead bowed. Only from time to time he raised his head and listened,especially when Grushenka was spoken of. When the prosecutor mentionedRakitin’s opinion of her, a smile of contempt and anger passed over hisface and he murmured rather audibly, “The Bernards!” When IppolitKirillovitch described how he had questioned and tortured him at Mokroe,Mitya raised his head and listened with intense curiosity. At one point heseemed about to jump up and cry out, but controlled himself and onlyshrugged his shoulders disdainfully. People talked afterwards of the endof the speech, of the prosecutor’s feat in examining the prisoner atMokroe, and jeered at Ippolit Kirillovitch. “The man could not resistboasting of his cleverness,” they said.
The court was adjourned, but only for a short interval, a quarter of anhour or twenty minutes at most. There was a hum of conversation andexclamations in the audience. I remember some of them.
“A weighty speech,” a gentleman in one group observed gravely.
“He brought in too much psychology,” said another voice.
“But it was all true, the absolute truth!”
“Yes, he is first rate at it.”
“He summed it all up.”
“Yes, he summed us up, too,” chimed in another voice. “Do you remember, atthe beginning of his speech, making out we were all like FyodorPavlovitch?”
“And at the end, too. But that was all rot.”
“And obscure too.”
“He was a little too much carried away.”
“It’s unjust, it’s unjust.”
“No, it was smartly done, anyway. He’s had long to wait, but he’s had hissay, ha ha!”
“What will the counsel for the defense say?”
In another group I heard:
“He had no business to make a thrust at the Petersburg man like that;‘appealing to your sensibilities’—do you remember?”
“Yes, that was awkward of him.”
“He was in too great a hurry.”
“He is a nervous man.”
“We laugh, but what must the prisoner be feeling?”
“Yes, what must it be for Mitya?”
In a third group:
“What lady is that, the fat one, with the lorgnette, sitting at the end?”
“She is a general’s wife, divorced, I know her.”
“That’s why she has the lorgnette.”
“She is not good for much.”
“Oh, no, she is a piquante little woman.”
“Two places beyond her there is a little fair woman, she is prettier.”
“They caught him smartly at Mokroe, didn’t they, eh?”
“Oh, it was smart enough. We’ve heard it before, how often he has told thestory at people’s houses!”
“And he couldn’t resist doing it now. That’s vanity.”
“He is a man with a grievance, he he!”
“Yes, and quick to take offense. And there was too much rhetoric, suchlong sentences.”
“Yes, he tries to alarm us, he kept trying to alarm us. Do you rememberabout the troika? Something about ‘They have Hamlets, but we have, so far,only Karamazovs!’ That was cleverly said!”
“That was to propitiate the liberals. He is afraid of them.”
“Yes, and he is afraid of the lawyer, too.”
“Yes, what will Fetyukovitch say?”
“Whatever he says, he won’t get round our peasants.”
“Don’t you think so?”
A fourth group:
“What he said about the troika was good, that piece about the othernations.”
“And that was true what he said about other nations not standing it.”
“What do you mean?”
“Why, in the English Parliament a Member got up last week and speakingabout the Nihilists asked the Ministry whether it was not high time tointervene, to educate this barbarous people. Ippolit was thinking of him,I know he was. He was talking about that last week.”
“Not an easy job.”
“Not an easy job? Why not?”
“Why, we’d shut up Kronstadt and not let them have any corn. Where wouldthey get it?”
“In America. They get it from America now.”
“Nonsense!”
But the bell rang, all rushed to their places. Fetyukovitch mounted thetribune.


Chapter X. The Speech For The Defense. An Argument That Cuts Both Ways

All was hushed as the first words of the famous orator rang out. The eyesof the audience were fastened upon him. He began very simply and directly,with an air of conviction, but not the slightest trace of conceit. He madeno attempt at eloquence, at pathos, or emotional phrases. He was like aman speaking in a circle of intimate and sympathetic friends. His voicewas a fine one, sonorous and sympathetic, and there was something genuineand simple in the very sound of it. But every one realized at once thatthe speaker might suddenly rise to genuine pathos and “pierce the heartwith untold power.” His language was perhaps more irregular than IppolitKirillovitch’s, but he spoke without long phrases, and indeed, with moreprecision. One thing did not please the ladies: he kept bending forward,especially at the beginning of his speech, not exactly bowing, but asthough he were about to dart at his listeners, bending his long spine inhalf, as though there were a spring in the middle that enabled him to bendalmost at right angles.
At the beginning of his speech he spoke rather disconnectedly, withoutsystem, one may say, dealing with facts separately, though, at the end,these facts formed a whole. His speech might be divided into two parts,the first consisting of criticism in refutation of the charge, sometimesmalicious and sarcastic. But in the second half he suddenly changed histone, and even his manner, and at once rose to pathos. The audience seemedon the look‐out for it, and quivered with enthusiasm.
He went straight to the point, and began by saying that although hepracticed in Petersburg, he had more than once visited provincial towns todefend prisoners, of whose innocence he had a conviction or at least apreconceived idea. “That is what has happened to me in the present case,”he explained. “From the very first accounts in the newspapers I was struckby something which strongly prepossessed me in the prisoner’s favor. Whatinterested me most was a fact which often occurs in legal practice, butrarely, I think, in such an extreme and peculiar form as in the presentcase. I ought to formulate that peculiarity only at the end of my speech,but I will do so at the very beginning, for it is my weakness to go towork directly, not keeping my effects in reserve and economizing mymaterial. That may be imprudent on my part, but at least it’s sincere.What I have in my mind is this: there is an overwhelming chain of evidenceagainst the prisoner, and at the same time not one fact that will standcriticism, if it is examined separately. As I followed the case moreclosely in the papers my idea was more and more confirmed, and I suddenlyreceived from the prisoner’s relatives a request to undertake his defense.I at once hurried here, and here I became completely convinced. It was tobreak down this terrible chain of facts, and to show that each piece ofevidence taken separately was unproved and fantastic, that I undertook thecase.”
So Fetyukovitch began.
“Gentlemen of the jury,” he suddenly protested, “I am new to thisdistrict. I have no preconceived ideas. The prisoner, a man of turbulentand unbridled temper, has not insulted me. But he has insulted perhapshundreds of persons in this town, and so prejudiced many people againsthim beforehand. Of course I recognize that the moral sentiment of localsociety is justly excited against him. The prisoner is of turbulent andviolent temper. Yet he was received in society here; he was even welcomein the family of my talented friend, the prosecutor.”
(N.B. At these words there were two or three laughs in the audience,quickly suppressed, but noticed by all. All of us knew that the prosecutorreceived Mitya against his will, solely because he had somehow interestedhis wife—a lady of the highest virtue and moral worth, but fanciful,capricious, and fond of opposing her husband, especially in trifles.Mitya’s visits, however, had not been frequent.)
“Nevertheless I venture to suggest,” Fetyukovitch continued, “that inspite of his independent mind and just character, my opponent may haveformed a mistaken prejudice against my unfortunate client. Oh, that is sonatural; the unfortunate man has only too well deserved such prejudice.Outraged morality, and still more outraged taste, is often relentless. Wehave, in the talented prosecutor’s speech, heard a stern analysis of theprisoner’s character and conduct, and his severe critical attitude to thecase was evident. And, what’s more, he went into psychological subtletiesinto which he could not have entered, if he had the least conscious andmalicious prejudice against the prisoner. But there are things which areeven worse, even more fatal in such cases, than the most malicious andconsciously unfair attitude. It is worse if we are carried away by theartistic instinct, by the desire to create, so to speak, a romance,especially if God has endowed us with psychological insight. Before Istarted on my way here, I was warned in Petersburg, and was myself aware,that I should find here a talented opponent whose psychological insightand subtlety had gained him peculiar renown in legal circles of recentyears. But profound as psychology is, it’s a knife that cuts both ways.”(Laughter among the public.) “You will, of course, forgive me mycomparison; I can’t boast of eloquence. But I will take as an example anypoint in the prosecutor’s speech.
“The prisoner, running away in the garden in the dark, climbed over thefence, was seized by the servant, and knocked him down with a brasspestle. Then he jumped back into the garden and spent five minutes overthe man, trying to discover whether he had killed him or not. And theprosecutor refuses to believe the prisoner’s statement that he ran to oldGrigory out of pity. ‘No,’ he says, ‘such sensibility is impossible atsuch a moment, that’s unnatural; he ran to find out whether the onlywitness of his crime was dead or alive, and so showed that he hadcommitted the murder, since he would not have run back for any otherreason.’
“Here you have psychology; but let us take the same method and apply it tothe case the other way round, and our result will be no less probable. Themurderer, we are told, leapt down to find out, as a precaution, whetherthe witness was alive or not, yet he had left in his murdered father’sstudy, as the prosecutor himself argues, an amazing piece of evidence inthe shape of a torn envelope, with an inscription that there had beenthree thousand roubles in it. ‘If he had carried that envelope away withhim, no one in the world would have known of that envelope and of thenotes in it, and that the money had been stolen by the prisoner.’ Thoseare the prosecutor’s own words. So on one side you see a complete absenceof precaution, a man who has lost his head and run away in a fright,leaving that clew on the floor, and two minutes later, when he has killedanother man, we are entitled to assume the most heartless and calculatingforesight in him. But even admitting this was so, it is psychologicalsubtlety, I suppose, that discerns that under certain circumstances Ibecome as bloodthirsty and keen‐sighted as a Caucasian eagle, while at thenext I am as timid and blind as a mole. But if I am so bloodthirsty andcruelly calculating that when I kill a man I only run back to find outwhether he is alive to witness against me, why should I spend five minuteslooking after my victim at the risk of encountering other witnesses? Whysoak my handkerchief, wiping the blood off his head so that it may beevidence against me later? If he were so cold‐hearted and calculating, whynot hit the servant on the head again and again with the same pestle so asto kill him outright and relieve himself of all anxiety about the witness?
“Again, though he ran to see whether the witness was alive, he leftanother witness on the path, that brass pestle which he had taken from thetwo women, and which they could always recognize afterwards as theirs, andprove that he had taken it from them. And it is not as though he hadforgotten it on the path, dropped it through carelessness or haste, no, hehad flung away his weapon, for it was found fifteen paces from whereGrigory lay. Why did he do so? Just because he was grieved at havingkilled a man, an old servant; and he flung away the pestle with a curse,as a murderous weapon. That’s how it must have been, what other reasoncould he have had for throwing it so far? And if he was capable of feelinggrief and pity at having killed a man, it shows that he was innocent ofhis father’s murder. Had he murdered him, he would never have run toanother victim out of pity; then he would have felt differently; histhoughts would have been centered on self‐preservation. He would have hadnone to spare for pity, that is beyond doubt. On the contrary, he wouldhave broken his skull instead of spending five minutes looking after him.There was room for pity and good‐feeling just because his conscience hadbeen clear till then. Here we have a different psychology. I havepurposely resorted to this method, gentlemen of the jury, to show that youcan prove anything by it. It all depends on who makes use of it.Psychology lures even most serious people into romancing, and quiteunconsciously. I am speaking of the abuse of psychology, gentlemen.”
Sounds of approval and laughter, at the expense of the prosecutor, wereagain audible in the court. I will not repeat the speech in detail; I willonly quote some passages from it, some leading points.


Chapter XI. There Was No Money. There Was No Robbery

There was one point that struck every one in Fetyukovitch’s speech. Heflatly denied the existence of the fatal three thousand roubles, andconsequently, the possibility of their having been stolen.
“Gentlemen of the jury,” he began. “Every new and unprejudiced observermust be struck by a characteristic peculiarity in the present case,namely, the charge of robbery, and the complete impossibility of provingthat there was anything to be stolen. We are told that money wasstolen—three thousand roubles—but whether those roubles ever existed,nobody knows. Consider, how have we heard of that sum, and who has seenthe notes? The only person who saw them, and stated that they had been putin the envelope, was the servant, Smerdyakov. He had spoken of it to theprisoner and his brother, Ivan Fyodorovitch, before the catastrophe.Madame Svyetlov, too, had been told of it. But not one of these threepersons had actually seen the notes, no one but Smerdyakov had seen them.
“Here the question arises, if it’s true that they did exist, and thatSmerdyakov had seen them, when did he see them for the last time? What ifhis master had taken the notes from under his bed and put them back in hiscash‐box without telling him? Note, that according to Smerdyakov’s storythe notes were kept under the mattress; the prisoner must have pulled themout, and yet the bed was absolutely unrumpled; that is carefully recordedin the protocol. How could the prisoner have found the notes withoutdisturbing the bed? How could he have helped soiling with his blood‐stained hands the fine and spotless linen with which the bed had beenpurposely made?
“But I shall be asked: What about the envelope on the floor? Yes, it’sworth saying a word or two about that envelope. I was somewhat surprisedjust now to hear the highly talented prosecutor declare of himself—ofhimself, observe—that but for that envelope, but for its being left on thefloor, no one in the world would have known of the existence of thatenvelope and the notes in it, and therefore of the prisoner’s havingstolen it. And so that torn scrap of paper is, by the prosecutor’s ownadmission, the sole proof on which the charge of robbery rests, ‘otherwiseno one would have known of the robbery, nor perhaps even of the money.’But is the mere fact that that scrap of paper was lying on the floor aproof that there was money in it, and that that money had been stolen?Yet, it will be objected, Smerdyakov had seen the money in the envelope.But when, when had he seen it for the last time, I ask you that? I talkedto Smerdyakov, and he told me that he had seen the notes two days beforethe catastrophe. Then why not imagine that old Fyodor Pavlovitch, lockedup alone in impatient and hysterical expectation of the object of hisadoration, may have whiled away the time by breaking open the envelope andtaking out the notes. ‘What’s the use of the envelope?’ he may have askedhimself. ‘She won’t believe the notes are there, but when I show her thethirty rainbow‐colored notes in one roll, it will make more impression,you may be sure, it will make her mouth water.’ And so he tears open theenvelope, takes out the money, and flings the envelope on the floor,conscious of being the owner and untroubled by any fears of leavingevidence.
“Listen, gentlemen, could anything be more likely than this theory andsuch an action? Why is it out of the question? But if anything of the sortcould have taken place, the charge of robbery falls to the ground; ifthere was no money, there was no theft of it. If the envelope on the floormay be taken as evidence that there had been money in it, why may I notmaintain the opposite, that the envelope was on the floor because themoney had been taken from it by its owner?
“But I shall be asked what became of the money if Fyodor Pavlovitch tookit out of the envelope since it was not found when the police searched thehouse? In the first place, part of the money was found in the cash‐box,and secondly, he might have taken it out that morning or the eveningbefore to make some other use of it, to give or send it away; he may havechanged his idea, his plan of action completely, without thinking itnecessary to announce the fact to Smerdyakov beforehand. And if there isthe barest possibility of such an explanation, how can the prisoner be sopositively accused of having committed murder for the sake of robbery, andof having actually carried out that robbery? This is encroaching on thedomain of romance. If it is maintained that something has been stolen, thething must be produced, or at least its existence must be proved beyonddoubt. Yet no one had ever seen these notes.
“Not long ago in Petersburg a young man of eighteen, hardly more than aboy, who carried on a small business as a costermonger, went in broaddaylight into a moneychanger’s shop with an ax, and with extraordinary,typical audacity killed the master of the shop and carried off fifteenhundred roubles. Five hours later he was arrested, and, except fifteenroubles he had already managed to spend, the whole sum was found on him.Moreover, the shopman, on his return to the shop after the murder,informed the police not only of the exact sum stolen, but even of thenotes and gold coins of which that sum was made up, and those very notesand coins were found on the criminal. This was followed by a full andgenuine confession on the part of the murderer. That’s what I callevidence, gentlemen of the jury! In that case I know, I see, I touch themoney, and cannot deny its existence. Is it the same in the present case?And yet it is a question of life and death.
“Yes, I shall be told, but he was carousing that night, squandering money;he was shown to have had fifteen hundred roubles—where did he get themoney? But the very fact that only fifteen hundred could be found, and theother half of the sum could nowhere be discovered, shows that that moneywas not the same, and had never been in any envelope. By strictcalculation of time it was proved at the preliminary inquiry that theprisoner ran straight from those women servants to Perhotin’s withoutgoing home, and that he had been nowhere. So he had been all the time incompany and therefore could not have divided the three thousand in halfand hidden half in the town. It’s just this consideration that has led theprosecutor to assume that the money is hidden in some crevice at Mokroe.Why not in the dungeons of the castle of Udolpho, gentlemen? Isn’t thissupposition really too fantastic and too romantic? And observe, if thatsupposition breaks down, the whole charge of robbery is scattered to thewinds, for in that case what could have become of the other fifteenhundred roubles? By what miracle could they have disappeared, since it’sproved the prisoner went nowhere else? And we are ready to ruin a man’slife with such tales!
“I shall be told that he could not explain where he got the fifteenhundred that he had, and every one knew that he was without money beforethat night. Who knew it, pray? The prisoner has made a clear andunflinching statement of the source of that money, and if you will have itso, gentlemen of the jury, nothing can be more probable than thatstatement, and more consistent with the temper and spirit of the prisoner.The prosecutor is charmed with his own romance. A man of weak will, whohad brought himself to take the three thousand so insultingly offered byhis betrothed, could not, we are told, have set aside half and sewn it up,but would, even if he had done so, have unpicked it every two days andtaken out a hundred, and so would have spent it all in a month. All this,you will remember, was put forward in a tone that brooked nocontradiction. But what if the thing happened quite differently? What ifyou’ve been weaving a romance, and about quite a different kind of man?That’s just it, you have invented quite a different man!
“I shall be told, perhaps, there are witnesses that he spent on one dayall that three thousand given him by his betrothed a month before thecatastrophe, so he could not have divided the sum in half. But who arethese witnesses? The value of their evidence has been shown in courtalready. Besides, in another man’s hand a crust always seems larger, andno one of these witnesses counted that money; they all judged simply atsight. And the witness Maximov has testified that the prisoner had twentythousand in his hand. You see, gentlemen of the jury, psychology is a two‐edged weapon. Let me turn the other edge now and see what comes of it.
“A month before the catastrophe the prisoner was entrusted by KaterinaIvanovna with three thousand roubles to send off by post. But the questionis: is it true that they were entrusted to him in such an insulting anddegrading way as was proclaimed just now? The first statement made by theyoung lady on the subject was different, perfectly different. In thesecond statement we heard only cries of resentment and revenge, cries oflong‐concealed hatred. And the very fact that the witness gave her firstevidence incorrectly, gives us a right to conclude that her second pieceof evidence may have been incorrect also. The prosecutor will not, darenot (his own words) touch on that story. So be it. I will not touch on iteither, but will only venture to observe that if a lofty and high‐principled person, such as that highly respected young lady unquestionablyis, if such a person, I say, allows herself suddenly in court tocontradict her first statement, with the obvious motive of ruining theprisoner, it is clear that this evidence has been given not impartially,not coolly. Have not we the right to assume that a revengeful woman mighthave exaggerated much? Yes, she may well have exaggerated, in particular,the insult and humiliation of her offering him the money. No, it wasoffered in such a way that it was possible to take it, especially for aman so easy‐going as the prisoner, above all, as he expected to receiveshortly from his father the three thousand roubles that he reckoned wasowing to him. It was unreflecting of him, but it was just hisirresponsible want of reflection that made him so confident that hisfather would give him the money, that he would get it, and so could alwaysdispatch the money entrusted to him and repay the debt.
“But the prosecutor refuses to allow that he could the same day have setaside half the money and sewn it up in a little bag. That’s not hischaracter, he tells us, he couldn’t have had such feelings. But yet hetalked himself of the broad Karamazov nature; he cried out about the twoextremes which a Karamazov can contemplate at once. Karamazov is just sucha two‐sided nature, fluctuating between two extremes, that even when movedby the most violent craving for riotous gayety, he can pull himself up, ifsomething strikes him on the other side. And on the other side islove—that new love which had flamed up in his heart, and for that love heneeded money; oh, far more than for carousing with his mistress. If shewere to say to him, ‘I am yours, I won’t have Fyodor Pavlovitch,’ then hemust have money to take her away. That was more important than carousing.Could a Karamazov fail to understand it? That anxiety was just what he wassuffering from—what is there improbable in his laying aside that money andconcealing it in case of emergency?
“But time passed, and Fyodor Pavlovitch did not give the prisoner theexpected three thousand; on the contrary, the latter heard that he meantto use this sum to seduce the woman he, the prisoner, loved. ‘If FyodorPavlovitch doesn’t give the money,’ he thought, ‘I shall be put in theposition of a thief before Katerina Ivanovna.’ And then the idea presenteditself to him that he would go to Katerina Ivanovna, lay before her thefifteen hundred roubles he still carried round his neck, and say, ‘I am ascoundrel, but not a thief.’ So here we have already a twofold reason whyhe should guard that sum of money as the apple of his eye, why heshouldn’t unpick the little bag, and spend it a hundred at a time. Whyshould you deny the prisoner a sense of honor? Yes, he has a sense ofhonor, granted that it’s misplaced, granted it’s often mistaken, yet itexists and amounts to a passion, and he has proved that.
“But now the affair becomes even more complex; his jealous torments reacha climax, and those same two questions torture his fevered brain more andmore: ‘If I repay Katerina Ivanovna, where can I find the means to go offwith Grushenka?’ If he behaved wildly, drank, and made disturbances in thetaverns in the course of that month, it was perhaps because he waswretched and strained beyond his powers of endurance. These two questionsbecame so acute that they drove him at last to despair. He sent hisyounger brother to beg for the last time for the three thousand roubles,but without waiting for a reply, burst in himself and ended by beating theold man in the presence of witnesses. After that he had no prospect ofgetting it from any one; his father would not give it him after thatbeating.
“The same evening he struck himself on the breast, just on the upper partof the breast where the little bag was, and swore to his brother that hehad the means of not being a scoundrel, but that still he would remain ascoundrel, for he foresaw that he would not use that means, that hewouldn’t have the character, that he wouldn’t have the will‐power to doit. Why, why does the prosecutor refuse to believe the evidence of AlexeyKaramazov, given so genuinely and sincerely, so spontaneously andconvincingly? And why, on the contrary, does he force me to believe inmoney hidden in a crevice, in the dungeons of the castle of Udolpho?
“The same evening, after his talk with his brother, the prisoner wrotethat fatal letter, and that letter is the chief, the most stupendous proofof the prisoner having committed robbery! ‘I shall beg from every one, andif I don’t get it I shall murder my father and shall take the envelopewith the pink ribbon on it from under his mattress as soon as Ivan hasgone.’ A full program of the murder, we are told, so it must have been he.‘It has all been done as he wrote,’ cries the prosecutor.
“But in the first place, it’s the letter of a drunken man and written ingreat irritation; secondly, he writes of the envelope from what he hasheard from Smerdyakov again, for he has not seen the envelope himself; andthirdly, he wrote it indeed, but how can you prove that he did it? Did theprisoner take the envelope from under the pillow, did he find the money,did that money exist indeed? And was it to get money that the prisoner ranoff, if you remember? He ran off post‐haste not to steal, but to find outwhere she was, the woman who had crushed him. He was not running to carryout a program, to carry out what he had written, that is, not for an actof premeditated robbery, but he ran suddenly, spontaneously, in a jealousfury. Yes! I shall be told, but when he got there and murdered him heseized the money, too. But did he murder him after all? The charge ofrobbery I repudiate with indignation. A man cannot be accused of robbery,if it’s impossible to state accurately what he has stolen; that’s anaxiom. But did he murder him without robbery, did he murder him at all? Isthat proved? Isn’t that, too, a romance?”


Chapter XII. And There Was No Murder Either

“Allow me, gentlemen of the jury, to remind you that a man’s life is atstake and that you must be careful. We have heard the prosecutor himselfadmit that until to‐day he hesitated to accuse the prisoner of a full andconscious premeditation of the crime; he hesitated till he saw that fataldrunken letter which was produced in court to‐day. ‘All was done aswritten.’ But, I repeat again, he was running to her, to seek her, solelyto find out where she was. That’s a fact that can’t be disputed. Had shebeen at home, he would not have run away, but would have remained at herside, and so would not have done what he promised in the letter. He ranunexpectedly and accidentally, and by that time very likely he did noteven remember his drunken letter. ‘He snatched up the pestle,’ they say,and you will remember how a whole edifice of psychology was built on thatpestle—why he was bound to look at that pestle as a weapon, to snatch itup, and so on, and so on. A very commonplace idea occurs to me at thispoint: What if that pestle had not been in sight, had not been lying onthe shelf from which it was snatched by the prisoner, but had been putaway in a cupboard? It would not have caught the prisoner’s eye, and hewould have run away without a weapon, with empty hands, and then he wouldcertainly not have killed any one. How then can I look upon the pestle asa proof of premeditation?
“Yes, but he talked in the taverns of murdering his father, and two daysbefore, on the evening when he wrote his drunken letter, he was quiet andonly quarreled with a shopman in the tavern, because a Karamazov could nothelp quarreling, forsooth! But my answer to that is, that, if he wasplanning such a murder in accordance with his letter, he certainly wouldnot have quarreled even with a shopman, and probably would not have goneinto the tavern at all, because a person plotting such a crime seeks quietand retirement, seeks to efface himself, to avoid being seen and heard,and that not from calculation, but from instinct. Gentlemen of the jury,the psychological method is a two‐edged weapon, and we, too, can use it.As for all this shouting in taverns throughout the month, don’t we oftenhear children, or drunkards coming out of taverns shout, ‘I’ll kill you’?but they don’t murder any one. And that fatal letter—isn’t that simplydrunken irritability, too? Isn’t that simply the shout of the brawleroutside the tavern, ‘I’ll kill you! I’ll kill the lot of you!’ Why not,why could it not be that? What reason have we to call that letter ‘fatal’rather than absurd? Because his father has been found murdered, because awitness saw the prisoner running out of the garden with a weapon in hishand, and was knocked down by him: therefore, we are told, everything wasdone as he had planned in writing, and the letter was not ‘absurd,’ but‘fatal.’
“Now, thank God! we’ve come to the real point: ‘since he was in thegarden, he must have murdered him.’ In those few words: ‘since he _was_,then he _must_’ lies the whole case for the prosecution. He was there, sohe must have. And what if there is no _must_ about it, even if he wasthere? Oh, I admit that the chain of evidence—the coincidences—are reallysuggestive. But examine all these facts separately, regardless of theirconnection. Why, for instance, does the prosecution refuse to admit thetruth of the prisoner’s statement that he ran away from his father’swindow? Remember the sarcasms in which the prosecutor indulged at theexpense of the respectful and ‘pious’ sentiments which suddenly came overthe murderer. But what if there were something of the sort, a feeling ofreligious awe, if not of filial respect? ‘My mother must have been prayingfor me at that moment,’ were the prisoner’s words at the preliminaryinquiry, and so he ran away as soon as he convinced himself that MadameSvyetlov was not in his father’s house. ‘But he could not convince himselfby looking through the window,’ the prosecutor objects. But why couldn’the? Why? The window opened at the signals given by the prisoner. Some wordmight have been uttered by Fyodor Pavlovitch, some exclamation whichshowed the prisoner that she was not there. Why should we assumeeverything as we imagine it, as we make up our minds to imagine it? Athousand things may happen in reality which elude the subtlestimagination.
“ ‘Yes, but Grigory saw the door open and so the prisoner certainly was inthe house, therefore he killed him.’ Now about that door, gentlemen of thejury.... Observe that we have only the statement of one witness as to thatdoor, and he was at the time in such a condition, that— But supposing thedoor was open; supposing the prisoner has lied in denying it, from aninstinct of self‐defense, natural in his position; supposing he did gointo the house—well, what then? How does it follow that because he wasthere he committed the murder? He might have dashed in, run through therooms; might have pushed his father away; might have struck him; but assoon as he had made sure Madame Svyetlov was not there, he may have runaway rejoicing that she was not there and that he had not killed hisfather. And it was perhaps just because he had escaped from the temptationto kill his father, because he had a clear conscience and was rejoicing atnot having killed him, that he was capable of a pure feeling, the feelingof pity and compassion, and leapt off the fence a minute later to theassistance of Grigory after he had, in his excitement, knocked him down.
“With terrible eloquence the prosecutor has described to us the dreadfulstate of the prisoner’s mind at Mokroe when love again lay before himcalling him to new life, while love was impossible for him because he hadhis father’s bloodstained corpse behind him and beyond thatcorpse—retribution. And yet the prosecutor allowed him love, which heexplained, according to his method, talking about his drunken condition,about a criminal being taken to execution, about it being still far off,and so on and so on. But again I ask, Mr. Prosecutor, have you notinvented a new personality? Is the prisoner so coarse and heartless as tobe able to think at that moment of love and of dodges to escapepunishment, if his hands were really stained with his father’s blood? No,no, no! As soon as it was made plain to him that she loved him and calledhim to her side, promising him new happiness, oh! then, I protest he musthave felt the impulse to suicide doubled, trebled, and must have killedhimself, if he had his father’s murder on his conscience. Oh, no! he wouldnot have forgotten where his pistols lay! I know the prisoner: the savage,stony heartlessness ascribed to him by the prosecutor is inconsistent withhis character. He would have killed himself, that’s certain. He did notkill himself just because ‘his mother’s prayers had saved him,’ and he wasinnocent of his father’s blood. He was troubled, he was grieving thatnight at Mokroe only about old Grigory and praying to God that the old manwould recover, that his blow had not been fatal, and that he would nothave to suffer for it. Why not accept such an interpretation of the facts?What trustworthy proof have we that the prisoner is lying?
“But we shall be told at once again, ‘There is his father’s corpse! If heran away without murdering him, who did murder him?’ Here, I repeat, youhave the whole logic of the prosecution. Who murdered him, if not he?There’s no one to put in his place.
“Gentlemen of the jury, is that really so? Is it positively, actually truethat there is no one else at all? We’ve heard the prosecutor count on hisfingers all the persons who were in that house that night. They were fivein number; three of them, I agree, could not have been responsible—themurdered man himself, old Grigory, and his wife. There are left then theprisoner and Smerdyakov, and the prosecutor dramatically exclaims that theprisoner pointed to Smerdyakov because he had no one else to fix on, thathad there been a sixth person, even a phantom of a sixth person, he wouldhave abandoned the charge against Smerdyakov at once in shame and haveaccused that other. But, gentlemen of the jury, why may I not draw thevery opposite conclusion? There are two persons—the prisoner andSmerdyakov. Why can I not say that you accuse my client, simply becauseyou have no one else to accuse? And you have no one else only because youhave determined to exclude Smerdyakov from all suspicion.
“It’s true, indeed, Smerdyakov is accused only by the prisoner, his twobrothers, and Madame Svyetlov. But there are others who accuse him: thereare vague rumors of a question, of a suspicion, an obscure report, afeeling of expectation. Finally, we have the evidence of a combination offacts very suggestive, though, I admit, inconclusive. In the first placewe have precisely on the day of the catastrophe that fit, for thegenuineness of which the prosecutor, for some reason, has felt obliged tomake a careful defense. Then Smerdyakov’s sudden suicide on the eve of thetrial. Then the equally startling evidence given in court to‐day by theelder of the prisoner’s brothers, who had believed in his guilt, but hasto‐day produced a bundle of notes and proclaimed Smerdyakov as themurderer. Oh, I fully share the court’s and the prosecutor’s convictionthat Ivan Karamazov is suffering from brain fever, that his statement mayreally be a desperate effort, planned in delirium, to save his brother bythrowing the guilt on the dead man. But again Smerdyakov’s name ispronounced, again there is a suggestion of mystery. There is somethingunexplained, incomplete. And perhaps it may one day be explained. But wewon’t go into that now. Of that later.
“The court has resolved to go on with the trial, but, meantime, I mightmake a few remarks about the character‐sketch of Smerdyakov drawn withsubtlety and talent by the prosecutor. But while I admire his talent Icannot agree with him. I have visited Smerdyakov, I have seen him andtalked to him, and he made a very different impression on me. He was weakin health, it is true; but in character, in spirit, he was by no means theweak man the prosecutor has made him out to be. I found in him no trace ofthe timidity on which the prosecutor so insisted. There was no simplicityabout him, either. I found in him, on the contrary, an extrememistrustfulness concealed under a mask of _naïveté_, and an intelligenceof considerable range. The prosecutor was too simple in taking him forweak‐minded. He made a very definite impression on me: I left him with theconviction that he was a distinctly spiteful creature, excessivelyambitious, vindictive, and intensely envious. I made some inquiries: heresented his parentage, was ashamed of it, and would clench his teeth whenhe remembered that he was the son of ‘stinking Lizaveta.’ He wasdisrespectful to the servant Grigory and his wife, who had cared for himin his childhood. He cursed and jeered at Russia. He dreamed of going toFrance and becoming a Frenchman. He used often to say that he hadn’t themeans to do so. I fancy he loved no one but himself and had a strangelyhigh opinion of himself. His conception of culture was limited to goodclothes, clean shirt‐fronts and polished boots. Believing himself to bethe illegitimate son of Fyodor Pavlovitch (there is evidence of this), hemight well have resented his position, compared with that of his master’slegitimate sons. They had everything, he nothing. They had all the rights,they had the inheritance, while he was only the cook. He told me himselfthat he had helped Fyodor Pavlovitch to put the notes in the envelope. Thedestination of that sum—a sum which would have made his career—must havebeen hateful to him. Moreover, he saw three thousand roubles in newrainbow‐colored notes. (I asked him about that on purpose.) Oh, beware ofshowing an ambitious and envious man a large sum of money at once! And itwas the first time he had seen so much money in the hands of one man. Thesight of the rainbow‐colored notes may have made a morbid impression onhis imagination, but with no immediate results.
“The talented prosecutor, with extraordinary subtlety, sketched for us allthe arguments for and against the hypothesis of Smerdyakov’s guilt, andasked us in particular what motive he had in feigning a fit. But he maynot have been feigning at all, the fit may have happened quite naturally,but it may have passed off quite naturally, and the sick man may haverecovered, not completely perhaps, but still regaining consciousness, ashappens with epileptics.
“The prosecutor asks at what moment could Smerdyakov have committed themurder. But it is very easy to point out that moment. He might have wakedup from deep sleep (for he was only asleep—an epileptic fit is alwaysfollowed by a deep sleep) at that moment when the old Grigory shouted atthe top of his voice ‘Parricide!’ That shout in the dark and stillness mayhave waked Smerdyakov whose sleep may have been less sound at the moment:he might naturally have waked up an hour before.
“Getting out of bed, he goes almost unconsciously and with no definitemotive towards the sound to see what’s the matter. His head is stillclouded with his attack, his faculties are half asleep; but, once in thegarden, he walks to the lighted windows and he hears terrible news fromhis master, who would be, of course, glad to see him. His mind sets towork at once. He hears all the details from his frightened master, andgradually in his disordered brain there shapes itself an idea—terrible,but seductive and irresistibly logical. To kill the old man, take thethree thousand, and throw all the blame on to his young master. A terriblelust of money, of booty, might seize upon him as he realized his securityfrom detection. Oh! these sudden and irresistible impulses come so oftenwhen there is a favorable opportunity, and especially with murderers whohave had no idea of committing a murder beforehand. And Smerdyakov mayhave gone in and carried out his plan. With what weapon? Why, with anystone picked up in the garden. But what for, with what object? Why, thethree thousand which means a career for him. Oh, I am not contradictingmyself—the money may have existed. And perhaps Smerdyakov alone knew whereto find it, where his master kept it. And the covering of the money—thetorn envelope on the floor?
“Just now, when the prosecutor was explaining his subtle theory that onlyan inexperienced thief like Karamazov would have left the envelope on thefloor, and not one like Smerdyakov, who would have avoided leaving a pieceof evidence against himself, I thought as I listened that I was hearingsomething very familiar, and, would you believe it, I have heard that veryargument, that very conjecture, of how Karamazov would have behaved,precisely two days before, from Smerdyakov himself. What’s more, it struckme at the time. I fancied that there was an artificial simplicity abouthim; that he was in a hurry to suggest this idea to me that I might fancyit was my own. He insinuated it, as it were. Did he not insinuate the sameidea at the inquiry and suggest it to the talented prosecutor?
“I shall be asked, ‘What about the old woman, Grigory’s wife? She heardthe sick man moaning close by, all night.’ Yes, she heard it, but thatevidence is extremely unreliable. I knew a lady who complained bitterlythat she had been kept awake all night by a dog in the yard. Yet the poorbeast, it appeared, had only yelped once or twice in the night. And that’snatural. If any one is asleep and hears a groan he wakes up, annoyed atbeing waked, but instantly falls asleep again. Two hours later, again agroan, he wakes up and falls asleep again; and the same thing again twohours later—three times altogether in the night. Next morning the sleeperwakes up and complains that some one has been groaning all night andkeeping him awake. And it is bound to seem so to him: the intervals of twohours of sleep he does not remember, he only remembers the moments ofwaking, so he feels he has been waked up all night.
“But why, why, asks the prosecutor, did not Smerdyakov confess in his lastletter? Why did his conscience prompt him to one step and not to both?But, excuse me, conscience implies penitence, and the suicide may not havefelt penitence, but only despair. Despair and penitence are two verydifferent things. Despair may be vindictive and irreconcilable, and thesuicide, laying his hands on himself, may well have felt redoubled hatredfor those whom he had envied all his life.
“Gentlemen of the jury, beware of a miscarriage of justice! What is thereunlikely in all I have put before you just now? Find the error in myreasoning; find the impossibility, the absurdity. And if there is but ashade of possibility, but a shade of probability in my propositions, donot condemn him. And is there only a shade? I swear by all that is sacred,I fully believe in the explanation of the murder I have just put forward.What troubles me and makes me indignant is that of all the mass of factsheaped up by the prosecution against the prisoner, there is not a singleone certain and irrefutable. And yet the unhappy man is to be ruined bythe accumulation of these facts. Yes, the accumulated effect is awful: theblood, the blood dripping from his fingers, the bloodstained shirt, thedark night resounding with the shout ‘Parricide!’ and the old man fallingwith a broken head. And then the mass of phrases, statements, gestures,shouts! Oh! this has so much influence, it can so bias the mind; but,gentlemen of the jury, can it bias your minds? Remember, you have beengiven absolute power to bind and to loose, but the greater the power, themore terrible its responsibility.
“I do not draw back one iota from what I have said just now, but supposefor one moment I agreed with the prosecution that my luckless client hadstained his hands with his father’s blood. This is only hypothesis, Irepeat; I never for one instant doubt of his innocence. But, so be it, Iassume that my client is guilty of parricide. Even so, hear what I have tosay. I have it in my heart to say something more to you, for I feel thatthere must be a great conflict in your hearts and minds.... Forgive myreferring to your hearts and minds, gentlemen of the jury, but I want tobe truthful and sincere to the end. Let us all be sincere!”
At this point the speech was interrupted by rather loud applause. The lastwords, indeed, were pronounced with a note of such sincerity that everyone felt that he really might have something to say, and that what he wasabout to say would be of the greatest consequence. But the President,hearing the applause, in a loud voice threatened to clear the court ifsuch an incident were repeated. Every sound was hushed and Fetyukovitchbegan in a voice full of feeling quite unlike the tone he had usedhitherto.


Chapter XIII. A Corrupter Of Thought

“It’s not only the accumulation of facts that threatens my client withruin, gentlemen of the jury,” he began, “what is really damning for myclient is one fact—the dead body of his father. Had it been an ordinarycase of murder you would have rejected the charge in view of thetriviality, the incompleteness, and the fantastic character of theevidence, if you examine each part of it separately; or, at least, youwould have hesitated to ruin a man’s life simply from the prejudiceagainst him which he has, alas! only too well deserved. But it’s not anordinary case of murder, it’s a case of parricide. That impresses men’sminds, and to such a degree that the very triviality and incompleteness ofthe evidence becomes less trivial and less incomplete even to anunprejudiced mind. How can such a prisoner be acquitted? What if hecommitted the murder and gets off unpunished? That is what every one,almost involuntarily, instinctively, feels at heart.
“Yes, it’s a fearful thing to shed a father’s blood—the father who hasbegotten me, loved me, not spared his life for me, grieved over myillnesses from childhood up, troubled all his life for my happiness, andhas lived in my joys, in my successes. To murder such a father—that’sinconceivable. Gentlemen of the jury, what is a father—a real father? Whatis the meaning of that great word? What is the great idea in that name? Wehave just indicated in part what a true father is and what he ought to be.In the case in which we are now so deeply occupied and over which ourhearts are aching—in the present case, the father, Fyodor PavlovitchKaramazov, did not correspond to that conception of a father to which wehave just referred. That’s the misfortune. And indeed some fathers are amisfortune. Let us examine this misfortune rather more closely: we mustshrink from nothing, gentlemen of the jury, considering the importance ofthe decision you have to make. It’s our particular duty not to shrink fromany idea, like children or frightened women, as the talented prosecutorhappily expresses it.
“But in the course of his heated speech my esteemed opponent (and he wasmy opponent before I opened my lips) exclaimed several times, ‘Oh, I willnot yield the defense of the prisoner to the lawyer who has come down fromPetersburg. I accuse, but I defend also!’ He exclaimed that several times,but forgot to mention that if this terrible prisoner was for twenty‐threeyears so grateful for a mere pound of nuts given him by the only man whohad been kind to him, as a child in his father’s house, might not such aman well have remembered for twenty‐three years how he ran in his father’sback‐yard, ‘without boots on his feet and with his little trousers hangingby one button’—to use the expression of the kind‐hearted doctor,Herzenstube?
“Oh, gentlemen of the jury, why need we look more closely at thismisfortune, why repeat what we all know already? What did my client meetwith when he arrived here, at his father’s house, and why depict my clientas a heartless egoist and monster? He is uncontrolled, he is wild andunruly—we are trying him now for that—but who is responsible for his life?Who is responsible for his having received such an unseemly bringing up,in spite of his excellent disposition and his grateful and sensitiveheart? Did any one train him to be reasonable? Was he enlightened bystudy? Did any one love him ever so little in his childhood? My client wasleft to the care of Providence like a beast of the field. He thirstedperhaps to see his father after long years of separation. A thousand timesperhaps he may, recalling his childhood, have driven away the loathsomephantoms that haunted his childish dreams and with all his heart he mayhave longed to embrace and to forgive his father! And what awaited him? Hewas met by cynical taunts, suspicions and wrangling about money. He heardnothing but revolting talk and vicious precepts uttered daily over thebrandy, and at last he saw his father seducing his mistress from him withhis own money. Oh, gentlemen of the jury, that was cruel and revolting!And that old man was always complaining of the disrespect and cruelty ofhis son. He slandered him in society, injured him, calumniated him, boughtup his unpaid debts to get him thrown into prison.
“Gentlemen of the jury, people like my client, who are fierce, unruly, anduncontrolled on the surface, are sometimes, most frequently indeed,exceedingly tender‐hearted, only they don’t express it. Don’t laugh, don’tlaugh at my idea! The talented prosecutor laughed mercilessly just now atmy client for loving Schiller—loving the sublime and beautiful! I shouldnot have laughed at that in his place. Yes, such natures—oh, let me speakin defense of such natures, so often and so cruelly misunderstood—thesenatures often thirst for tenderness, goodness, and justice, as it were, incontrast to themselves, their unruliness, their ferocity—they thirst forit unconsciously. Passionate and fierce on the surface, they are painfullycapable of loving woman, for instance, and with a spiritual and elevatedlove. Again do not laugh at me, this is very often the case in suchnatures. But they cannot hide their passions—sometimes very coarse—andthat is conspicuous and is noticed, but the inner man is unseen. Theirpassions are quickly exhausted; but, by the side of a noble and loftycreature that seemingly coarse and rough man seeks a new life, seeks tocorrect himself, to be better, to become noble and honorable, ‘sublime andbeautiful,’ however much the expression has been ridiculed.
“I said just now that I would not venture to touch upon my client’sengagement. But I may say half a word. What we heard just now was notevidence, but only the scream of a frenzied and revengeful woman, and itwas not for her—oh, not for her!—to reproach him with treachery, for shehas betrayed him! If she had had but a little time for reflection shewould not have given such evidence. Oh, do not believe her! No, my clientis not a monster, as she called him!
“The Lover of Mankind on the eve of His Crucifixion said: ‘I am the GoodShepherd. The good shepherd lays down his life for his sheep, so that notone of them might be lost.’ Let not a man’s soul be lost through us!
“I asked just now what does ‘father’ mean, and exclaimed that it was agreat word, a precious name. But one must use words honestly, gentlemen,and I venture to call things by their right names: such a father as oldKaramazov cannot be called a father and does not deserve to be. Filiallove for an unworthy father is an absurdity, an impossibility. Love cannotbe created from nothing: only God can create something from nothing.
“ ‘Fathers, provoke not your children to wrath,’ the apostle writes, froma heart glowing with love. It’s not for the sake of my client that I quotethese sacred words, I mention them for all fathers. Who has authorized meto preach to fathers? No one. But as a man and a citizen I make myappeal—_vivos voco!_ We are not long on earth, we do many evil deeds andsay many evil words. So let us all catch a favorable moment when we areall together to say a good word to each other. That’s what I am doing:while I am in this place I take advantage of my opportunity. Not fornothing is this tribune given us by the highest authority—all Russia hearsus! I am not speaking only for the fathers here present, I cry aloud toall fathers: ‘Fathers, provoke not your children to wrath.’ Yes, let usfirst fulfill Christ’s injunction ourselves and only then venture toexpect it of our children. Otherwise we are not fathers, but enemies ofour children, and they are not our children, but our enemies, and we havemade them our enemies ourselves. ‘What measure ye mete it shall bemeasured unto you again’—it’s not I who say that, it’s the Gospel precept,measure to others according as they measure to you. How can we blamechildren if they measure us according to our measure?
“Not long ago a servant girl in Finland was suspected of having secretlygiven birth to a child. She was watched, and a box of which no one knewanything was found in the corner of the loft, behind some bricks. It wasopened and inside was found the body of a new‐born child which she hadkilled. In the same box were found the skeletons of two other babieswhich, according to her own confession, she had killed at the moment oftheir birth.
“Gentlemen of the jury, was she a mother to her children? She gave birthto them, indeed; but was she a mother to them? Would any one venture togive her the sacred name of mother? Let us be bold, gentlemen, let us beaudacious even: it’s our duty to be so at this moment and not to be afraidof certain words and ideas like the Moscow women in Ostrovsky’s play, whoare scared at the sound of certain words. No, let us prove that theprogress of the last few years has touched even us, and let us sayplainly, the father is not merely he who begets the child, but he whobegets it and does his duty by it.
“Oh, of course, there is the other meaning, there is the otherinterpretation of the word ‘father,’ which insists that any father, eventhough he be a monster, even though he be the enemy of his children, stillremains my father simply because he begot me. But this is, so to say, themystical meaning which I cannot comprehend with my intellect, but can onlyaccept by faith, or, better to say, _on faith_, like many other thingswhich I do not understand, but which religion bids me believe. But in thatcase let it be kept outside the sphere of actual life. In the sphere ofactual life, which has, indeed, its own rights, but also lays upon usgreat duties and obligations, in that sphere, if we want to behumane—Christian, in fact—we must, or ought to, act only upon convictionsjustified by reason and experience, which have been passed through thecrucible of analysis; in a word, we must act rationally, and not as thoughin dream and delirium, that we may not do harm, that we may not ill‐treatand ruin a man. Then it will be real Christian work, not only mystic, butrational and philanthropic....”
There was violent applause at this passage from many parts of the court,but Fetyukovitch waved his hands as though imploring them to let himfinish without interruption. The court relapsed into silence at once. Theorator went on.
“Do you suppose, gentlemen, that our children as they grow up and begin toreason can avoid such questions? No, they cannot, and we will not imposeon them an impossible restriction. The sight of an unworthy fatherinvoluntarily suggests tormenting questions to a young creature,especially when he compares him with the excellent fathers of hiscompanions. The conventional answer to this question is: ‘He begot you,and you are his flesh and blood, and therefore you are bound to love him.’The youth involuntarily reflects: ‘But did he love me when he begot me?’he asks, wondering more and more. ‘Was it for my sake he begot me? He didnot know me, not even my sex, at that moment, at the moment of passion,perhaps, inflamed by wine, and he has only transmitted to me a propensityto drunkenness—that’s all he’s done for me.... Why am I bound to love himsimply for begetting me when he has cared nothing for me all my lifeafter?’
“Oh, perhaps those questions strike you as coarse and cruel, but do notexpect an impossible restraint from a young mind. ‘Drive nature out of thedoor and it will fly in at the window,’ and, above all, let us not beafraid of words, but decide the question according to the dictates ofreason and humanity and not of mystic ideas. How shall it be decided? Why,like this. Let the son stand before his father and ask him, ‘Father, tellme, why must I love you? Father, show me that I must love you,’ and ifthat father is able to answer him and show him good reason, we have areal, normal, parental relation, not resting on mystical prejudice, but ona rational, responsible and strictly humanitarian basis. But if he doesnot, there’s an end to the family tie. He is not a father to him, and theson has a right to look upon him as a stranger, and even an enemy. Ourtribune, gentlemen of the jury, ought to be a school of true and soundideas.”
(Here the orator was interrupted by irrepressible and almost franticapplause. Of course, it was not the whole audience, but a good half of itapplauded. The fathers and mothers present applauded. Shrieks andexclamations were heard from the gallery, where the ladies were sitting.Handkerchiefs were waved. The President began ringing his bell with allhis might. He was obviously irritated by the behavior of the audience, butdid not venture to clear the court as he had threatened. Even persons ofhigh position, old men with stars on their breasts, sitting on speciallyreserved seats behind the judges, applauded the orator and waved theirhandkerchiefs. So that when the noise died down, the President confinedhimself to repeating his stern threat to clear the court, andFetyukovitch, excited and triumphant, continued his speech.)
“Gentlemen of the jury, you remember that awful night of which so much hasbeen said to‐day, when the son got over the fence and stood face to facewith the enemy and persecutor who had begotten him. I insist mostemphatically it was not for money he ran to his father’s house: the chargeof robbery is an absurdity, as I proved before. And it was not to murderhim he broke into the house, oh, no! If he had had that design he would,at least, have taken the precaution of arming himself beforehand. Thebrass pestle he caught up instinctively without knowing why he did it.Granted that he deceived his father by tapping at the window, granted thathe made his way in—I’ve said already that I do not for a moment believethat legend, but let it be so, let us suppose it for a moment. Gentlemen,I swear to you by all that’s holy, if it had not been his father, but anordinary enemy, he would, after running through the rooms and satisfyinghimself that the woman was not there, have made off, post‐haste, withoutdoing any harm to his rival. He would have struck him, pushed him awayperhaps, nothing more, for he had no thought and no time to spare forthat. What he wanted to know was where she was. But his father, hisfather! The mere sight of the father who had hated him from his childhood,had been his enemy, his persecutor, and now his unnatural rival, wasenough! A feeling of hatred came over him involuntarily, irresistibly,clouding his reason. It all surged up in one moment! It was an impulse ofmadness and insanity, but also an impulse of nature, irresistibly andunconsciously (like everything in nature) avenging the violation of itseternal laws.
“But the prisoner even then did not murder him—I maintain that, I cry thataloud!—no, he only brandished the pestle in a burst of indignant disgust,not meaning to kill him, not knowing that he would kill him. Had he nothad this fatal pestle in his hand, he would have only knocked his fatherdown perhaps, but would not have killed him. As he ran away, he did notknow whether he had killed the old man. Such a murder is not a murder.Such a murder is not a parricide. No, the murder of such a father cannotbe called parricide. Such a murder can only be reckoned parricide byprejudice.
“But I appeal to you again and again from the depths of my soul; did thismurder actually take place? Gentlemen of the jury, if we convict andpunish him, he will say to himself: ‘These people have done nothing for mybringing up, for my education, nothing to improve my lot, nothing to makeme better, nothing to make me a man. These people have not given me to eatand to drink, have not visited me in prison and nakedness, and here theyhave sent me to penal servitude. I am quits, I owe them nothing now, andowe no one anything for ever. They are wicked and I will be wicked. Theyare cruel and I will be cruel.’ That is what he will say, gentlemen of thejury. And I swear, by finding him guilty you will only make it easier forhim: you will ease his conscience, he will curse the blood he has shed andwill not regret it. At the same time you will destroy in him thepossibility of becoming a new man, for he will remain in his wickednessand blindness all his life.
“But do you want to punish him fearfully, terribly, with the most awfulpunishment that could be imagined, and at the same time to save him andregenerate his soul? If so, overwhelm him with your mercy! You will see,you will hear how he will tremble and be horror‐struck. ‘How can I endurethis mercy? How can I endure so much love? Am I worthy of it?’ That’s whathe will exclaim.
“Oh, I know, I know that heart, that wild but grateful heart, gentlemen ofthe jury! It will bow before your mercy; it thirsts for a great and lovingaction, it will melt and mount upwards. There are souls which, in theirlimitation, blame the whole world. But subdue such a soul with mercy, showit love, and it will curse its past, for there are many good impulses init. Such a heart will expand and see that God is merciful and that men aregood and just. He will be horror‐stricken; he will be crushed by remorseand the vast obligation laid upon him henceforth. And he will not saythen, ‘I am quits,’ but will say, ‘I am guilty in the sight of all men andam more unworthy than all.’ With tears of penitence and poignant, tenderanguish, he will exclaim: ‘Others are better than I, they wanted to saveme, not to ruin me!’ Oh, this act of mercy is so easy for you, for in theabsence of anything like real evidence it will be too awful for you topronounce: ‘Yes, he is guilty.’
“Better acquit ten guilty men than punish one innocent man! Do you hear,do you hear that majestic voice from the past century of our glorioushistory? It is not for an insignificant person like me to remind you thatthe Russian court does not exist for the punishment only, but also for thesalvation of the criminal! Let other nations think of retribution and theletter of the law, we will cling to the spirit and the meaning—thesalvation and the reformation of the lost. If this is true, if Russia andher justice are such, she may go forward with good cheer! Do not try toscare us with your frenzied troikas from which all the nations stand asidein disgust. Not a runaway troika, but the stately chariot of Russia willmove calmly and majestically to its goal. In your hands is the fate of myclient, in your hands is the fate of Russian justice. You will defend it,you will save it, you will prove that there are men to watch over it, thatit is in good hands!”


Chapter XIV. The Peasants Stand Firm

This was how Fetyukovitch concluded his speech, and the enthusiasm of theaudience burst like an irresistible storm. It was out of the question tostop it: the women wept, many of the men wept too, even two importantpersonages shed tears. The President submitted, and even postponed ringinghis bell. The suppression of such an enthusiasm would be the suppressionof something sacred, as the ladies cried afterwards. The orator himselfwas genuinely touched.
And it was at this moment that Ippolit Kirillovitch got up to make certainobjections. People looked at him with hatred. “What? What’s the meaning ofit? He positively dares to make objections,” the ladies babbled. But ifthe whole world of ladies, including his wife, had protested he could nothave been stopped at that moment. He was pale, he was shaking withemotion, his first phrases were even unintelligible, he gasped for breath,could hardly speak clearly, lost the thread. But he soon recoveredhimself. Of this new speech of his I will quote only a few sentences.
“... I am reproached with having woven a romance. But what is this defenseif not one romance on the top of another? All that was lacking was poetry.Fyodor Pavlovitch, while waiting for his mistress, tears open the envelopeand throws it on the floor. We are even told what he said while engaged inthis strange act. Is not this a flight of fancy? And what proof have wethat he had taken out the money? Who heard what he said? The weak‐mindedidiot, Smerdyakov, transformed into a Byronic hero, avenging society forhis illegitimate birth—isn’t this a romance in the Byronic style? And theson who breaks into his father’s house and murders him without murderinghim is not even a romance—this is a sphinx setting us a riddle which hecannot solve himself. If he murdered him, he murdered him, and what’s themeaning of his murdering him without having murdered him—who can make heador tail of this?
“Then we are admonished that our tribune is a tribune of true and soundideas and from this tribune of ‘sound ideas’ is heard a solemn declarationthat to call the murder of a father ‘parricide’ is nothing but aprejudice! But if parricide is a prejudice, and if every child is to askhis father why he is to love him, what will become of us? What will becomeof the foundations of society? What will become of the family? Parricide,it appears, is only a bogy of Moscow merchants’ wives. The most precious,the most sacred guarantees for the destiny and future of Russian justiceare presented to us in a perverted and frivolous form, simply to attain anobject—to obtain the justification of something which cannot be justified.‘Oh, crush him by mercy,’ cries the counsel for the defense; but that’sall the criminal wants, and to‐morrow it will be seen how much he iscrushed. And is not the counsel for the defense too modest in asking onlyfor the acquittal of the prisoner? Why not found a charity in the honor ofthe parricide to commemorate his exploit among future generations?Religion and the Gospel are corrected—that’s all mysticism, we are told,and ours is the only true Christianity which has been subjected to theanalysis of reason and common sense. And so they set up before us a falsesemblance of Christ! ‘What measure ye mete so it shall be meted unto youagain,’ cried the counsel for the defense, and instantly deduces thatChrist teaches us to measure as it is measured to us—and this from thetribune of truth and sound sense! We peep into the Gospel only on the eveof making speeches, in order to dazzle the audience by our acquaintancewith what is, anyway, a rather original composition, which may be of useto produce a certain effect—all to serve the purpose! But what Christcommands us is something very different: He bids us beware of doing this,because the wicked world does this, but we ought to forgive and to turnthe other cheek, and not to measure to our persecutors as they measure tous. This is what our God has taught us and not that to forbid children tomurder their fathers is a prejudice. And we will not from the tribune oftruth and good sense correct the Gospel of our Lord, Whom the counsel forthe defense deigns to call only ‘the crucified lover of humanity,’ inopposition to all orthodox Russia, which calls to Him, ‘For Thou art ourGod!’ ”
At this the President intervened and checked the over‐zealous speaker,begging him not to exaggerate, not to overstep the bounds, and so on, aspresidents always do in such cases. The audience, too, was uneasy. Thepublic was restless: there were even exclamations of indignation.Fetyukovitch did not so much as reply; he only mounted the tribune to layhis hand on his heart and, with an offended voice, utter a few words fullof dignity. He only touched again, lightly and ironically, on “romancing”and “psychology,” and in an appropriate place quoted, “Jupiter, you areangry, therefore you are wrong,” which provoked a burst of approvinglaughter in the audience, for Ippolit Kirillovitch was by no means likeJupiter. Then, _à propos_ of the accusation that he was teaching the younggeneration to murder their fathers, Fetyukovitch observed, with greatdignity, that he would not even answer. As for the prosecutor’s charge ofuttering unorthodox opinions, Fetyukovitch hinted that it was a personalinsinuation and that he had expected in this court to be secure fromaccusations “damaging to my reputation as a citizen and a loyal subject.”But at these words the President pulled him up, too, and Fetyukovitchconcluded his speech with a bow, amid a hum of approbation in the court.And Ippolit Kirillovitch was, in the opinion of our ladies, “crushed forgood.”
Then the prisoner was allowed to speak. Mitya stood up, but said verylittle. He was fearfully exhausted, physically and mentally. The look ofstrength and independence with which he had entered in the morning hadalmost disappeared. He seemed as though he had passed through anexperience that day, which had taught him for the rest of his lifesomething very important he had not understood till then. His voice wasweak, he did not shout as before. In his words there was a new note ofhumility, defeat and submission.
“What am I to say, gentlemen of the jury? The hour of judgment has comefor me, I feel the hand of God upon me! The end has come to an erring man!But, before God, I repeat to you, I am innocent of my father’s blood! Forthe last time I repeat, it wasn’t I killed him! I was erring, but I lovedwhat is good. Every instant I strove to reform, but I lived like a wildbeast. I thank the prosecutor, he told me many things about myself that Idid not know; but it’s not true that I killed my father, the prosecutor ismistaken. I thank my counsel, too. I cried listening to him; but it’s nottrue that I killed my father, and he needn’t have supposed it. And don’tbelieve the doctors. I am perfectly sane, only my heart is heavy. If youspare me, if you let me go, I will pray for you. I will be a better man. Igive you my word before God I will! And if you will condemn me, I’ll breakmy sword over my head myself and kiss the pieces. But spare me, do not robme of my God! I know myself, I shall rebel! My heart is heavy, gentlemen... spare me!”
He almost fell back in his place: his voice broke: he could hardlyarticulate the last phrase. Then the judges proceeded to put the questionsand began to ask both sides to formulate their conclusions.
But I will not describe the details. At last the jury rose to retire forconsultation. The President was very tired, and so his last charge to thejury was rather feeble. “Be impartial, don’t be influenced by theeloquence of the defense, but yet weigh the arguments. Remember that thereis a great responsibility laid upon you,” and so on and so on.
The jury withdrew and the court adjourned. People could get up, moveabout, exchange their accumulated impressions, refresh themselves at thebuffet. It was very late, almost one o’clock in the night, but nobody wentaway: the strain was so great that no one could think of repose. Allwaited with sinking hearts; though that is, perhaps, too much to say, forthe ladies were only in a state of hysterical impatience and their heartswere untroubled. An acquittal, they thought, was inevitable. They allprepared themselves for a dramatic moment of general enthusiasm. I mustown there were many among the men, too, who were convinced that anacquittal was inevitable. Some were pleased, others frowned, while somewere simply dejected, not wanting him to be acquitted. Fetyukovitchhimself was confident of his success. He was surrounded by peoplecongratulating him and fawning upon him.
“There are,” he said to one group, as I was told afterwards, “there areinvisible threads binding the counsel for the defense with the jury. Onefeels during one’s speech if they are being formed. I was aware of them.They exist. Our cause is won. Set your mind at rest.”
“What will our peasants say now?” said one stout, cross‐looking, pock‐marked gentleman, a landowner of the neighborhood, approaching a group ofgentlemen engaged in conversation.
“But they are not all peasants. There are four government clerks amongthem.”
“Yes, there are clerks,” said a member of the district council, joiningthe group.
“And do you know that Nazaryev, the merchant with the medal, a juryman?”
“What of him?”
“He is a man with brains.”
“But he never speaks.”
“He is no great talker, but so much the better. There’s no need for thePetersburg man to teach him: he could teach all Petersburg himself. He’sthe father of twelve children. Think of that!”
“Upon my word, you don’t suppose they won’t acquit him?” one of our youngofficials exclaimed in another group.
“They’ll acquit him for certain,” said a resolute voice.
“It would be shameful, disgraceful, not to acquit him!” cried theofficial. “Suppose he did murder him—there are fathers and fathers! And,besides, he was in such a frenzy.... He really may have done nothing butswing the pestle in the air, and so knocked the old man down. But it was apity they dragged the valet in. That was simply an absurd theory! If I’dbeen in Fetyukovitch’s place, I should simply have said straight out: ‘Hemurdered him; but he is not guilty, hang it all!’ ”
“That’s what he did, only without saying, ‘Hang it all!’ ”
“No, Mihail Semyonovitch, he almost said that, too,” put in a third voice.
“Why, gentlemen, in Lent an actress was acquitted in our town who had cutthe throat of her lover’s lawful wife.”
“Oh, but she did not finish cutting it.”
“That makes no difference. She began cutting it.”
“What did you think of what he said about children? Splendid, wasn’t it?”
“Splendid!”
“And about mysticism, too!”
“Oh, drop mysticism, do!” cried some one else; “think of Ippolit and hisfate from this day forth. His wife will scratch his eyes out to‐morrow forMitya’s sake.”
“Is she here?”
“What an idea! If she’d been here she’d have scratched them out in court.She is at home with toothache. He he he!”
“He he he!”
In a third group:
“I dare say they will acquit Mitenka, after all.”
“I should not be surprised if he turns the ‘Metropolis’ upside down to‐morrow. He will be drinking for ten days!”
“Oh, the devil!”
“The devil’s bound to have a hand in it. Where should he be if not here?”
“Well, gentlemen, I admit it was eloquent. But still it’s not the thing tobreak your father’s head with a pestle! Or what are we coming to?”
“The chariot! Do you remember the chariot?”
“Yes; he turned a cart into a chariot!”
“And to‐morrow he will turn a chariot into a cart, just to suit hispurpose.”
“What cunning chaps there are nowadays! Is there any justice to be had inRussia?”
But the bell rang. The jury deliberated for exactly an hour, neither morenor less. A profound silence reigned in the court as soon as the publichad taken their seats. I remember how the jurymen walked into the court.At last! I won’t repeat the questions in order, and, indeed, I haveforgotten them. I remember only the answer to the President’s first andchief question: “Did the prisoner commit the murder for the sake ofrobbery and with premeditation?” (I don’t remember the exact words.) Therewas a complete hush. The foreman of the jury, the youngest of the clerks,pronounced, in a clear, loud voice, amidst the deathlike stillness of thecourt:
“Yes, guilty!”
And the same answer was repeated to every question: “Yes, guilty!” andwithout the slightest extenuating comment. This no one had expected;almost every one had reckoned upon a recommendation to mercy, at least.The deathlike silence in the court was not broken—all seemed petrified:those who desired his conviction as well as those who had been eager forhis acquittal. But that was only for the first instant, and it wasfollowed by a fearful hubbub. Many of the men in the audience werepleased. Some were rubbing their hands with no attempt to conceal theirjoy. Those who disagreed with the verdict seemed crushed, shrugged theirshoulders, whispered, but still seemed unable to realize this. But howshall I describe the state the ladies were in? I thought they would createa riot. At first they could scarcely believe their ears. Then suddenly thewhole court rang with exclamations: “What’s the meaning of it? What next?”They leapt up from their places. They seemed to fancy that it might be atonce reconsidered and reversed. At that instant Mitya suddenly stood upand cried in a heartrending voice, stretching his hands out before him:
“I swear by God and the dreadful Day of Judgment I am not guilty of myfather’s blood! Katya, I forgive you! Brothers, friends, have pity on theother woman!”
He could not go on, and broke into a terrible sobbing wail that was heardall over the court in a strange, unnatural voice unlike his own. From thefarthest corner at the back of the gallery came a piercing shriek—it wasGrushenka. She had succeeded in begging admittance to the court againbefore the beginning of the lawyers’ speeches. Mitya was taken away. Thepassing of the sentence was deferred till next day. The whole court was ina hubbub but I did not wait to hear. I only remember a few exclamations Iheard on the steps as I went out.
“He’ll have a twenty years’ trip to the mines!”
“Not less.”
“Well, our peasants have stood firm.”
“And have done for our Mitya.”




EPILOGUE



Chapter I. Plans For Mitya’s Escape

Very early, at nine o’clock in the morning, five days after the trial,Alyosha went to Katerina Ivanovna’s to talk over a matter of greatimportance to both of them, and to give her a message. She sat and talkedto him in the very room in which she had once received Grushenka. In thenext room Ivan Fyodorovitch lay unconscious in a high fever. KaterinaIvanovna had immediately after the scene at the trial ordered the sick andunconscious man to be carried to her house, disregarding the inevitablegossip and general disapproval of the public. One of the two relations wholived with her had departed to Moscow immediately after the scene incourt, the other remained. But if both had gone away, Katerina Ivanovnawould have adhered to her resolution, and would have gone on nursing thesick man and sitting by him day and night. Varvinsky and Herzenstube wereattending him. The famous doctor had gone back to Moscow, refusing to givean opinion as to the probable end of the illness. Though the doctorsencouraged Katerina Ivanovna and Alyosha, it was evident that they couldnot yet give them positive hopes of recovery.
Alyosha came to see his sick brother twice a day. But this time he hadspecially urgent business, and he foresaw how difficult it would be toapproach the subject, yet he was in great haste. He had another engagementthat could not be put off for that same morning, and there was need ofhaste.
They had been talking for a quarter of an hour. Katerina Ivanovna was paleand terribly fatigued, yet at the same time in a state of hystericalexcitement. She had a presentiment of the reason why Alyosha had come toher.
“Don’t worry about his decision,” she said, with confident emphasis toAlyosha. “One way or another he is bound to come to it. He must escape.That unhappy man, that hero of honor and principle—not he, not DmitriFyodorovitch, but the man lying the other side of that door, who hassacrificed himself for his brother,” Katya added, with flashing eyes—“toldme the whole plan of escape long ago. You know he has already entered intonegotiations.... I’ve told you something already.... You see, it willprobably come off at the third _étape_ from here, when the party ofprisoners is being taken to Siberia. Oh, it’s a long way off yet. IvanFyodorovitch has already visited the superintendent of the third _étape_.But we don’t know yet who will be in charge of the party, and it’simpossible to find that out so long beforehand. To‐morrow perhaps I willshow you in detail the whole plan which Ivan Fyodorovitch left me on theeve of the trial in case of need.... That was when—do you remember?—youfound us quarreling. He had just gone down‐stairs, but seeing you I madehim come back; do you remember? Do you know what we were quarreling aboutthen?”
“No, I don’t,” said Alyosha.
“Of course he did not tell you. It was about that plan of escape. He hadtold me the main idea three days before, and we began quarreling about itat once and quarreled for three days. We quarreled because, when he toldme that if Dmitri Fyodorovitch were convicted he would escape abroad withthat creature, I felt furious at once—I can’t tell you why, I don’t knowmyself why.... Oh, of course, I was furious then about that creature, andthat she, too, should go abroad with Dmitri!” Katerina Ivanovna exclaimedsuddenly, her lips quivering with anger. “As soon as Ivan Fyodorovitch sawthat I was furious about that woman, he instantly imagined I was jealousof Dmitri and that I still loved Dmitri. That is how our first quarrelbegan. I would not give an explanation, I could not ask forgiveness. Icould not bear to think that such a man could suspect me of still lovingthat ... and when I myself had told him long before that I did not loveDmitri, that I loved no one but him! It was only resentment against thatcreature that made me angry with him. Three days later, on the evening youcame, he brought me a sealed envelope, which I was to open at once, ifanything happened to him. Oh, he foresaw his illness! He told me that theenvelope contained the details of the escape, and that if he died or wastaken dangerously ill, I was to save Mitya alone. Then he left me money,nearly ten thousand—those notes to which the prosecutor referred in hisspeech, having learnt from some one that he had sent them to be changed. Iwas tremendously impressed to find that Ivan Fyodorovitch had not given uphis idea of saving his brother, and was confiding this plan of escape tome, though he was still jealous of me and still convinced that I lovedMitya. Oh, that was a sacrifice! No, you cannot understand the greatnessof such self‐sacrifice, Alexey Fyodorovitch. I wanted to fall at his feetin reverence, but I thought at once that he would take it only for my joyat the thought of Mitya’s being saved (and he certainly would haveimagined that!), and I was so exasperated at the mere possibility of suchan unjust thought on his part that I lost my temper again, and instead ofkissing his feet, flew into a fury again! Oh, I am unhappy! It’s mycharacter, my awful, unhappy character! Oh, you will see, I shall end bydriving him, too, to abandon me for another with whom he can get onbetter, like Dmitri. But ... no, I could not bear it, I should killmyself. And when you came in then, and when I called to you and told himto come back, I was so enraged by the look of contempt and hatred heturned on me that—do you remember?—I cried out to you that it was he, healone who had persuaded me that his brother Dmitri was a murderer! I saidthat malicious thing on purpose to wound him again. He had never, neverpersuaded me that his brother was a murderer. On the contrary, it was Iwho persuaded him! Oh, my vile temper was the cause of everything! I pavedthe way to that hideous scene at the trial. He wanted to show me that hewas an honorable man, and that, even if I loved his brother, he would notruin him for revenge or jealousy. So he came to the court ... I am thecause of it all, I alone am to blame!”
Katya never had made such confessions to Alyosha before, and he felt thatshe was now at that stage of unbearable suffering when even the proudestheart painfully crushes its pride and falls vanquished by grief. Oh,Alyosha knew another terrible reason of her present misery, though she hadcarefully concealed it from him during those days since the trial; but itwould have been for some reason too painful to him if she had been broughtso low as to speak to him now about that. She was suffering for her“treachery” at the trial, and Alyosha felt that her conscience wasimpelling her to confess it to him, to him, Alyosha, with tears and criesand hysterical writhings on the floor. But he dreaded that moment andlonged to spare her. It made the commission on which he had come even moredifficult. He spoke of Mitya again.
“It’s all right, it’s all right, don’t be anxious about him!” she beganagain, sharply and stubbornly. “All that is only momentary, I know him, Iknow his heart only too well. You may be sure he will consent to escape.It’s not as though it would be immediately; he will have time to make uphis mind to it. Ivan Fyodorovitch will be well by that time and willmanage it all himself, so that I shall have nothing to do with it. Don’tbe anxious; he will consent to run away. He has agreed already: do yousuppose he would give up that creature? And they won’t let her go to him,so he is bound to escape. It’s you he’s most afraid of, he is afraid youwon’t approve of his escape on moral grounds. But you must generously_allow_ it, if your sanction is so necessary,” Katya added viciously. Shepaused and smiled.
“He talks about some hymn,” she went on again, “some cross he has to bear,some duty; I remember Ivan Fyodorovitch told me a great deal about it, andif you knew how he talked!” Katya cried suddenly, with feeling she couldnot repress, “if you knew how he loved that wretched man at the moment hetold me, and how he hated him, perhaps, at the same moment. And I heardhis story and his tears with sneering disdain. Brute! Yes, I am a brute. Iam responsible for his fever. But that man in prison is incapable ofsuffering,” Katya concluded irritably. “Can such a man suffer? Men likehim never suffer!”
There was a note of hatred and contemptuous repulsion in her words. Andyet it was she who had betrayed him. “Perhaps because she feels how she’swronged him she hates him at moments,” Alyosha thought to himself. Hehoped that it was only “at moments.” In Katya’s last words he detected achallenging note, but he did not take it up.
“I sent for you this morning to make you promise to persuade him yourself.Or do you, too, consider that to escape would be dishonorable, cowardly,or something ... unchristian, perhaps?” Katya added, even more defiantly.
“Oh, no. I’ll tell him everything,” muttered Alyosha. “He asks you to comeand see him to‐day,” he blurted out suddenly, looking her steadily in theface. She started, and drew back a little from him on the sofa.
“Me? Can that be?” she faltered, turning pale.
“It can and ought to be!” Alyosha began emphatically, growing moreanimated. “He needs you particularly just now. I would not have opened thesubject and worried you, if it were not necessary. He is ill, he is besidehimself, he keeps asking for you. It is not to be reconciled with you thathe wants you, but only that you would go and show yourself at his door. Somuch has happened to him since that day. He realizes that he has injuredyou beyond all reckoning. He does not ask your forgiveness—‘It’simpossible to forgive me,’ he says himself—but only that you would showyourself in his doorway.”
“It’s so sudden....” faltered Katya. “I’ve had a presentiment all thesedays that you would come with that message. I knew he would ask me tocome. It’s impossible!”
“Let it be impossible, but do it. Only think, he realizes for the firsttime how he has wounded you, the first time in his life; he had nevergrasped it before so fully. He said, ‘If she refuses to come I shall beunhappy all my life.’ Do you hear? though he is condemned to penalservitude for twenty years, he is still planning to be happy—is not thatpiteous? Think—you must visit him; though he is ruined, he is innocent,”broke like a challenge from Alyosha. “His hands are clean, there is noblood on them! For the sake of his infinite sufferings in the future visithim now. Go, greet him on his way into the darkness—stand at his door,that is all.... You ought to do it, you ought to!” Alyosha concluded,laying immense stress on the word “ought.”
“I ought to ... but I cannot....” Katya moaned. “He will look at me.... Ican’t.”
“Your eyes ought to meet. How will you live all your life, if you don’tmake up your mind to do it now?”
“Better suffer all my life.”
“You ought to go, you ought to go,” Alyosha repeated with mercilessemphasis.
“But why to‐day, why at once?... I can’t leave our patient—”
“You can for a moment. It will only be a moment. If you don’t come, hewill be in delirium by to‐night. I would not tell you a lie; have pity onhim!”
“Have pity on _me!_” Katya said, with bitter reproach, and she burst intotears.
“Then you will come,” said Alyosha firmly, seeing her tears. “I’ll go andtell him you will come directly.”
“No, don’t tell him so on any account,” cried Katya in alarm. “I willcome, but don’t tell him beforehand, for perhaps I may go, but not goin.... I don’t know yet—”
Her voice failed her. She gasped for breath. Alyosha got up to go.
“And what if I meet any one?” she said suddenly, in a low voice, turningwhite again.
“That’s just why you must go now, to avoid meeting any one. There will beno one there, I can tell you that for certain. We will expect you,” heconcluded emphatically, and went out of the room.



Chapter II. For A Moment The Lie Becomes Truth

He hurried to the hospital where Mitya was lying now. The day after hisfate was determined, Mitya had fallen ill with nervous fever, and was sentto the prison division of the town hospital. But at the request of severalpersons (Alyosha, Madame Hohlakov, Lise, etc.), Doctor Varvinsky had putMitya not with other prisoners, but in a separate little room, the onewhere Smerdyakov had been. It is true that there was a sentinel at theother end of the corridor, and there was a grating over the window, sothat Varvinsky could be at ease about the indulgence he had shown, whichwas not quite legal, indeed; but he was a kind‐hearted and compassionateyoung man. He knew how hard it would be for a man like Mitya to pass atonce so suddenly into the society of robbers and murderers, and that hemust get used to it by degrees. The visits of relations and friends wereinformally sanctioned by the doctor and overseer, and even by the policecaptain. But only Alyosha and Grushenka had visited Mitya. Rakitin hadtried to force his way in twice, but Mitya persistently begged Varvinskynot to admit him.
Alyosha found him sitting on his bed in a hospital dressing‐gown, ratherfeverish, with a towel, soaked in vinegar and water, on his head. Helooked at Alyosha as he came in with an undefined expression, but therewas a shade of something like dread discernible in it. He had becometerribly preoccupied since the trial; sometimes he would be silent forhalf an hour together, and seemed to be pondering something heavily andpainfully, oblivious of everything about him. If he roused himself fromhis brooding and began to talk, he always spoke with a kind of abruptnessand never of what he really wanted to say. He looked sometimes with a faceof suffering at his brother. He seemed to be more at ease with Grushenkathan with Alyosha. It is true, he scarcely spoke to her at all, but assoon as she came in, his whole face lighted up with joy.
Alyosha sat down beside him on the bed in silence. This time Mitya waswaiting for Alyosha in suspense, but he did not dare ask him a question.He felt it almost unthinkable that Katya would consent to come, and at thesame time he felt that if she did not come, something inconceivable wouldhappen. Alyosha understood his feelings.
“Trifon Borissovitch,” Mitya began nervously, “has pulled his whole inn topieces, I am told. He’s taken up the flooring, pulled apart the planks,split up all the gallery, I am told. He is seeking treasure all thetime—the fifteen hundred roubles which the prosecutor said I’d hiddenthere. He began playing these tricks, they say, as soon as he got home.Serve him right, the swindler! The guard here told me yesterday; he comesfrom there.”
“Listen,” began Alyosha. “She will come, but I don’t know when. Perhapsto‐day, perhaps in a few days, that I can’t tell. But she will come, shewill, that’s certain.”
Mitya started, would have said something, but was silent. The news had atremendous effect on him. It was evident that he would have liked terriblyto know what had been said, but he was again afraid to ask. Somethingcruel and contemptuous from Katya would have cut him like a knife at thatmoment.
“This was what she said among other things; that I must be sure to setyour conscience at rest about escaping. If Ivan is not well by then shewill see to it all herself.”
“You’ve spoken of that already,” Mitya observed musingly.
“And you have repeated it to Grusha,” observed Alyosha.
“Yes,” Mitya admitted. “She won’t come this morning.” He looked timidly athis brother. “She won’t come till the evening. When I told her yesterdaythat Katya was taking measures, she was silent, but she set her mouth. Sheonly whispered, ‘Let her!’ She understood that it was important. I did notdare to try her further. She understands now, I think, that Katya nolonger cares for me, but loves Ivan.”
“Does she?” broke from Alyosha.
“Perhaps she does not. Only she is not coming this morning,” Mityahastened to explain again; “I asked her to do something for me. You know,Ivan is superior to all of us. He ought to live, not us. He will recover.”
“Would you believe it, though Katya is alarmed about him, she scarcelydoubts of his recovery,” said Alyosha.
“That means that she is convinced he will die. It’s because she isfrightened she’s so sure he will get well.”
“Ivan has a strong constitution, and I, too, believe there’s every hopethat he will get well,” Alyosha observed anxiously.
“Yes, he will get well. But she is convinced that he will die. She has agreat deal of sorrow to bear...” A silence followed. A grave anxiety wasfretting Mitya.
“Alyosha, I love Grusha terribly,” he said suddenly in a shaking voice,full of tears.
“They won’t let her go out there to you,” Alyosha put in at once.
“And there is something else I wanted to tell you,” Mitya went on, with asudden ring in his voice. “If they beat me on the way or out there, Iwon’t submit to it. I shall kill some one, and shall be shot for it. Andthis will be going on for twenty years! They speak to me rudely as it is.I’ve been lying here all night, passing judgment on myself. I am notready! I am not able to resign myself. I wanted to sing a ‘hymn’; but if aguard speaks rudely to me, I have not the strength to bear it. For GrushaI would bear anything ... anything except blows.... But she won’t beallowed to come there.”
Alyosha smiled gently.
“Listen, brother, once for all,” he said. “This is what I think about it.And you know that I would not tell you a lie. Listen: you are not ready,and such a cross is not for you. What’s more, you don’t need such amartyr’s cross when you are not ready for it. If you had murdered ourfather, it would grieve me that you should reject your punishment. But youare innocent, and such a cross is too much for you. You wanted to makeyourself another man by suffering. I say, only remember that other manalways, all your life and wherever you go; and that will be enough foryou. Your refusal of that great cross will only serve to make you feel allyour life an even greater duty, and that constant feeling will do more tomake you a new man, perhaps, than if you went there. For there you wouldnot endure it and would repine, and perhaps at last would say: ‘I amquits.’ The lawyer was right about that. Such heavy burdens are not forall men. For some they are impossible. These are my thoughts about it, ifyou want them so much. If other men would have to answer for your escape,officers or soldiers, then I would not have ‘allowed’ you,” smiledAlyosha. “But they declare—the superintendent of that _étape_ told Ivanhimself—that if it’s well managed there will be no great inquiry, and thatthey can get off easily. Of course, bribing is dishonest even in such acase, but I can’t undertake to judge about it, because if Ivan and Katyacommissioned me to act for you, I know I should go and give bribes. I musttell you the truth. And so I can’t judge of your own action. But let meassure you that I shall never condemn you. And it would be a strange thingif I could judge you in this. Now I think I’ve gone into everything.”
“But I do condemn myself!” cried Mitya. “I shall escape, that was settledapart from you; could Mitya Karamazov do anything but run away? But Ishall condemn myself, and I will pray for my sin for ever. That’s how theJesuits talk, isn’t it? Just as we are doing?”
“Yes.” Alyosha smiled gently.
“I love you for always telling the whole truth and never hiding anything,”cried Mitya, with a joyful laugh. “So I’ve caught my Alyosha beingJesuitical. I must kiss you for that. Now listen to the rest; I’ll openthe other side of my heart to you. This is what I planned and decided. IfI run away, even with money and a passport, and even to America, I shouldbe cheered up by the thought that I am not running away for pleasure, notfor happiness, but to another exile as bad, perhaps, as Siberia. It is asbad, Alyosha, it is! I hate that America, damn it, already. Even thoughGrusha will be with me. Just look at her; is she an American? She isRussian, Russian to the marrow of her bones; she will be homesick for themother country, and I shall see every hour that she is suffering for mysake, that she has taken up that cross for me. And what harm has she done?And how shall I, too, put up with the rabble out there, though they may bebetter than I, every one of them? I hate that America already! And thoughthey may be wonderful at machinery, every one of them, damn them, they arenot of my soul. I love Russia, Alyosha, I love the Russian God, though Iam a scoundrel myself. I shall choke there!” he exclaimed, his eyessuddenly flashing. His voice was trembling with tears. “So this is whatI’ve decided, Alyosha, listen,” he began again, mastering his emotion. “Assoon as I arrive there with Grusha, we will set to work at once on theland, in solitude, somewhere very remote, with wild bears. There must besome remote parts even there. I am told there are still Redskins there,somewhere, on the edge of the horizon. So to the country of the _Last ofthe Mohicans_, and there we’ll tackle the grammar at once, Grusha and I.Work and grammar—that’s how we’ll spend three years. And by that time weshall speak English like any Englishman. And as soon as we’ve learntit—good‐by to America! We’ll run here to Russia as American citizens.Don’t be uneasy—we would not come to this little town. We’d hidesomewhere, a long way off, in the north or in the south. I shall bechanged by that time, and she will, too, in America. The doctors shallmake me some sort of wart on my face—what’s the use of their being somechanical!—or else I’ll put out one eye, let my beard grow a yard, and Ishall turn gray, fretting for Russia. I dare say they won’t recognize us.And if they do, let them send us to Siberia. I don’t care. It will showit’s our fate. We’ll work on the land here, too, somewhere in the wilds,and I’ll make up as an American all my life. But we shall die on our ownsoil. That’s my plan, and it shan’t be altered. Do you approve?”
“Yes,” said Alyosha, not wanting to contradict him. Mitya paused for aminute and said suddenly:
“And how they worked it up at the trial! Didn’t they work it up!”
“If they had not, you would have been convicted just the same,” saidAlyosha, with a sigh.
“Yes, people are sick of me here! God bless them, but it’s hard,” Mityamoaned miserably. Again there was silence for a minute.
“Alyosha, put me out of my misery at once!” he exclaimed suddenly. “Tellme, is she coming now, or not? Tell me? What did she say? How did she sayit?”
“She said she would come, but I don’t know whether she will come to‐day.It’s hard for her, you know,” Alyosha looked timidly at his brother.
“I should think it is hard for her! Alyosha, it will drive me out of mymind. Grusha keeps looking at me. She understands. My God, calm my heart:what is it I want? I want Katya! Do I understand what I want? It’s theheadstrong, evil Karamazov spirit! No, I am not fit for suffering. I am ascoundrel, that’s all one can say.”
“Here she is!” cried Alyosha.
At that instant Katya appeared in the doorway. For a moment she stoodstill, gazing at Mitya with a dazed expression. He leapt impulsively tohis feet, and a scared look came into his face. He turned pale, but atimid, pleading smile appeared on his lips at once, and with anirresistible impulse he held out both hands to Katya. Seeing it, she flewimpetuously to him. She seized him by the hands, and almost by force madehim sit down on the bed. She sat down beside him, and still keeping hishands pressed them violently. Several times they both strove to speak, butstopped short and again gazed speechless with a strange smile, their eyesfastened on one another. So passed two minutes.
“Have you forgiven me?” Mitya faltered at last, and at the same momentturning to Alyosha, his face working with joy, he cried, “Do you hear whatI am asking, do you hear?”
“That’s what I loved you for, that you are generous at heart!” broke fromKatya. “My forgiveness is no good to you, nor yours to me; whether youforgive me or not, you will always be a sore place in my heart, and I inyours—so it must be....” She stopped to take breath. “What have I comefor?” she began again with nervous haste: “to embrace your feet, to pressyour hands like this, till it hurts—you remember how in Moscow I used tosqueeze them—to tell you again that you are my god, my joy, to tell youthat I love you madly,” she moaned in anguish, and suddenly pressed hishand greedily to her lips. Tears streamed from her eyes. Alyosha stoodspeechless and confounded; he had never expected what he was seeing.
“Love is over, Mitya!” Katya began again, “but the past is painfully dearto me. Know that you will always be so. But now let what might have beencome true for one minute,” she faltered, with a drawn smile, looking intohis face joyfully again. “You love another woman, and I love another man,and yet I shall love you for ever, and you will love me; do you know that?Do you hear? Love me, love me all your life!” she cried, with a quiveralmost of menace in her voice.
“I shall love you, and ... do you know, Katya,” Mitya began, drawing adeep breath at each word, “do you know, five days ago, that same evening,I loved you.... When you fell down and were carried out ... All my life!So it will be, so it will always be—”
So they murmured to one another frantic words, almost meaningless, perhapsnot even true, but at that moment it was all true, and they both believedwhat they said implicitly.
“Katya,” cried Mitya suddenly, “do you believe I murdered him? I know youdon’t believe it now, but then ... when you gave evidence.... Surely,surely you did not believe it!”
“I did not believe it even then. I’ve never believed it. I hated you, andfor a moment I persuaded myself. While I was giving evidence I persuadedmyself and believed it, but when I’d finished speaking I left offbelieving it at once. Don’t doubt that! I have forgotten that I came hereto punish myself,” she said, with a new expression in her voice, quiteunlike the loving tones of a moment before.
“Woman, yours is a heavy burden,” broke, as it were, involuntarily fromMitya.
“Let me go,” she whispered. “I’ll come again. It’s more than I can bearnow.”
She was getting up from her place, but suddenly uttered a loud scream andstaggered back. Grushenka walked suddenly and noiselessly into the room.No one had expected her. Katya moved swiftly to the door, but when shereached Grushenka, she stopped suddenly, turned as white as chalk andmoaned softly, almost in a whisper:
“Forgive me!”
Grushenka stared at her and, pausing for an instant, in a vindictive,venomous voice, answered:
“We are full of hatred, my girl, you and I! We are both full of hatred! Asthough we could forgive one another! Save him, and I’ll worship you all mylife.”
“You won’t forgive her!” cried Mitya, with frantic reproach.
“Don’t be anxious, I’ll save him for you!” Katya whispered rapidly, andshe ran out of the room.
“And you could refuse to forgive her when she begged your forgivenessherself?” Mitya exclaimed bitterly again.
“Mitya, don’t dare to blame her; you have no right to!” Alyosha criedhotly.
“Her proud lips spoke, not her heart,” Grushenka brought out in a tone ofdisgust. “If she saves you I’ll forgive her everything—”
She stopped speaking, as though suppressing something. She could not yetrecover herself. She had come in, as appeared afterwards, accidentally,with no suspicion of what she would meet.
“Alyosha, run after her!” Mitya cried to his brother; “tell her ... Idon’t know ... don’t let her go away like this!”
“I’ll come to you again at nightfall,” said Alyosha, and he ran afterKatya. He overtook her outside the hospital grounds. She was walking fast,but as soon as Alyosha caught her up she said quickly:
“No, before that woman I can’t punish myself! I asked her forgivenessbecause I wanted to punish myself to the bitter end. She would not forgiveme.... I like her for that!” she added, in an unnatural voice, and hereyes flashed with fierce resentment.
“My brother did not expect this in the least,” muttered Alyosha. “He wassure she would not come—”
“No doubt. Let us leave that,” she snapped. “Listen: I can’t go with youto the funeral now. I’ve sent them flowers. I think they still have money.If necessary, tell them I’ll never abandon them.... Now leave me, leaveme, please. You are late as it is—the bells are ringing for theservice.... Leave me, please!”



Chapter III. Ilusha’s Funeral. The Speech At The Stone

He really was late. They had waited for him and had already decided tobear the pretty flower‐decked little coffin to the church without him. Itwas the coffin of poor little Ilusha. He had died two days after Mitya wassentenced. At the gate of the house Alyosha was met by the shouts of theboys, Ilusha’s schoolfellows. They had all been impatiently expecting himand were glad that he had come at last. There were about twelve of them,they all had their school‐bags or satchels on their shoulders. “Fatherwill cry, be with father,” Ilusha had told them as he lay dying, and theboys remembered it. Kolya Krassotkin was the foremost of them.
“How glad I am you’ve come, Karamazov!” he cried, holding out his hand toAlyosha. “It’s awful here. It’s really horrible to see it. Snegiryov isnot drunk, we know for a fact he’s had nothing to drink to‐day, but heseems as if he were drunk ... I am always manly, but this is awful.Karamazov, if I am not keeping you, one question before you go in?”
“What is it, Kolya?” said Alyosha.
“Is your brother innocent or guilty? Was it he killed your father or wasit the valet? As you say, so it will be. I haven’t slept for the last fournights for thinking of it.”
“The valet killed him, my brother is innocent,” answered Alyosha.
“That’s what I said,” cried Smurov.
“So he will perish an innocent victim!” exclaimed Kolya; “though he isruined he is happy! I could envy him!”
“What do you mean? How can you? Why?” cried Alyosha surprised.
“Oh, if I, too, could sacrifice myself some day for truth!” said Kolyawith enthusiasm.
“But not in such a cause, not with such disgrace and such horror!” saidAlyosha.
“Of course ... I should like to die for all humanity, and as for disgrace,I don’t care about that—our names may perish. I respect your brother!”
“And so do I!” the boy, who had once declared that he knew who had foundedTroy, cried suddenly and unexpectedly, and he blushed up to his ears likea peony as he had done on that occasion.
Alyosha went into the room. Ilusha lay with his hands folded and his eyesclosed in a blue coffin with a white frill round it. His thin face washardly changed at all, and strange to say there was no smell of decay fromthe corpse. The expression of his face was serious and, as it were,thoughtful. His hands, crossed over his breast, looked particularlybeautiful, as though chiseled in marble. There were flowers in his handsand the coffin, inside and out, was decked with flowers, which had beensent early in the morning by Lise Hohlakov. But there were flowers toofrom Katerina Ivanovna, and when Alyosha opened the door, the captain hada bunch in his trembling hands and was strewing them again over his dearboy. He scarcely glanced at Alyosha when he came in, and he would not lookat any one, even at his crazy weeping wife, “mamma,” who kept trying tostand on her crippled legs to get a nearer look at her dead boy. Nina hadbeen pushed in her chair by the boys close up to the coffin. She sat withher head pressed to it and she too was no doubt quietly weeping.Snegiryov’s face looked eager, yet bewildered and exasperated. There wassomething crazy about his gestures and the words that broke from him. “Oldman, dear old man!” he exclaimed every minute, gazing at Ilusha. It washis habit to call Ilusha “old man,” as a term of affection when he wasalive.
“Father, give me a flower, too; take that white one out of his hand andgive it me,” the crazy mother begged, whimpering. Either because thelittle white rose in Ilusha’s hand had caught her fancy or that she wantedone from his hand to keep in memory of him, she moved restlessly,stretching out her hands for the flower.
“I won’t give it to any one, I won’t give you anything,” Snegiryov criedcallously. “They are his flowers, not yours! Everything is his, nothing isyours!”
“Father, give mother a flower!” said Nina, lifting her face wet withtears.
“I won’t give away anything and to her less than any one! She didn’t loveIlusha. She took away his little cannon and he gave it to her,” thecaptain broke into loud sobs at the thought of how Ilusha had given up hiscannon to his mother. The poor, crazy creature was bathed in noiselesstears, hiding her face in her hands.
The boys, seeing that the father would not leave the coffin and that itwas time to carry it out, stood round it in a close circle and began tolift it up.
“I don’t want him to be buried in the churchyard,” Snegiryov wailedsuddenly; “I’ll bury him by the stone, by our stone! Ilusha told me to. Iwon’t let him be carried out!”
He had been saying for the last three days that he would bury him by thestone, but Alyosha, Krassotkin, the landlady, her sister and all the boysinterfered.
“What an idea, bury him by an unholy stone, as though he had hangedhimself!” the old landlady said sternly. “There in the churchyard theground has been crossed. He’ll be prayed for there. One can hear thesinging in church and the deacon reads so plainly and verbally that itwill reach him every time just as though it were read over his grave.”
At last the captain made a gesture of despair as though to say, “Take himwhere you will.” The boys raised the coffin, but as they passed themother, they stopped for a moment and lowered it that she might say good‐by to Ilusha. But on seeing that precious little face, which for the lastthree days she had only looked at from a distance, she trembled all overand her gray head began twitching spasmodically over the coffin.
“Mother, make the sign of the cross over him, give him your blessing, kisshim,” Nina cried to her. But her head still twitched like an automaton andwith a face contorted with bitter grief she began, without a word, beatingher breast with her fist. They carried the coffin past her. Nina pressedher lips to her brother’s for the last time as they bore the coffin byher. As Alyosha went out of the house he begged the landlady to look afterthose who were left behind, but she interrupted him before he hadfinished.
“To be sure, I’ll stay with them, we are Christians, too.” The old womanwept as she said it.
They had not far to carry the coffin to the church, not more than threehundred paces. It was a still, clear day, with a slight frost. The churchbells were still ringing. Snegiryov ran fussing and distracted after thecoffin, in his short old summer overcoat, with his head bare and his soft,old, wide‐brimmed hat in his hand. He seemed in a state of bewilderedanxiety. At one minute he stretched out his hand to support the head ofthe coffin and only hindered the bearers, at another he ran alongside andtried to find a place for himself there. A flower fell on the snow and herushed to pick it up as though everything in the world depended on theloss of that flower.
“And the crust of bread, we’ve forgotten the crust!” he cried suddenly indismay. But the boys reminded him at once that he had taken the crust ofbread already and that it was in his pocket. He instantly pulled it outand was reassured.
“Ilusha told me to, Ilusha,” he explained at once to Alyosha. “I wassitting by him one night and he suddenly told me: ‘Father, when my graveis filled up crumble a piece of bread on it so that the sparrows may flydown, I shall hear and it will cheer me up not to be lying alone.’ ”
“That’s a good thing,” said Alyosha, “we must often take some.”
“Every day, every day!” said the captain quickly, seeming cheered at thethought.
They reached the church at last and set the coffin in the middle of it.The boys surrounded it and remained reverently standing so, all throughthe service. It was an old and rather poor church; many of the ikons werewithout settings; but such churches are the best for praying in. Duringthe mass Snegiryov became somewhat calmer, though at times he hadoutbursts of the same unconscious and, as it were, incoherent anxiety. Atone moment he went up to the coffin to set straight the cover or thewreath, when a candle fell out of the candlestick he rushed to replace itand was a fearful time fumbling over it, then he subsided and stoodquietly by the coffin with a look of blank uneasiness and perplexity.After the Epistle he suddenly whispered to Alyosha, who was standingbeside him, that the Epistle had not been read properly but did notexplain what he meant. During the prayer, “Like the Cherubim,” he joinedin the singing but did not go on to the end. Falling on his knees, hepressed his forehead to the stone floor and lay so for a long while.
At last came the funeral service itself and candles were distributed. Thedistracted father began fussing about again, but the touching andimpressive funeral prayers moved and roused his soul. He seemed suddenlyto shrink together and broke into rapid, short sobs, which he tried atfirst to smother, but at last he sobbed aloud. When they began takingleave of the dead and closing the coffin, he flung his arms about, asthough he would not allow them to cover Ilusha, and began greedily andpersistently kissing his dead boy on the lips. At last they succeeded inpersuading him to come away from the step, but suddenly he impulsivelystretched out his hand and snatched a few flowers from the coffin. Helooked at them and a new idea seemed to dawn upon him, so that heapparently forgot his grief for a minute. Gradually he seemed to sink intobrooding and did not resist when the coffin was lifted up and carried tothe grave. It was an expensive one in the churchyard close to the church,Katerina Ivanovna had paid for it. After the customary rites the grave‐diggers lowered the coffin. Snegiryov with his flowers in his hands bentdown so low over the open grave that the boys caught hold of his coat inalarm and pulled him back. He did not seem to understand fully what washappening. When they began filling up the grave, he suddenly pointedanxiously at the falling earth and began trying to say something, but noone could make out what he meant, and he stopped suddenly. Then he wasreminded that he must crumble the bread and he was awfully excited,snatched up the bread and began pulling it to pieces and flinging themorsels on the grave.
“Come, fly down, birds, fly down, sparrows!” he muttered anxiously.
One of the boys observed that it was awkward for him to crumble the breadwith the flowers in his hands and suggested he should give them to someone to hold for a time. But he would not do this and seemed indeedsuddenly alarmed for his flowers, as though they wanted to take them fromhim altogether. And after looking at the grave, and as it were, satisfyinghimself that everything had been done and the bread had been crumbled, hesuddenly, to the surprise of every one, turned, quite composedly even, andmade his way homewards. But his steps became more and more hurried, healmost ran. The boys and Alyosha kept up with him.
“The flowers are for mamma, the flowers are for mamma! I was unkind tomamma,” he began exclaiming suddenly.
Some one called to him to put on his hat as it was cold. But he flung thehat in the snow as though he were angry and kept repeating, “I won’t havethe hat, I won’t have the hat.” Smurov picked it up and carried it afterhim. All the boys were crying, and Kolya and the boy who discovered aboutTroy most of all. Though Smurov, with the captain’s hat in his hand, wascrying bitterly too, he managed, as he ran, to snatch up a piece of redbrick that lay on the snow of the path, to fling it at the flock ofsparrows that was flying by. He missed them, of course, and went on cryingas he ran. Half‐way, Snegiryov suddenly stopped, stood still for half aminute, as though struck by something, and suddenly turning back to thechurch, ran towards the deserted grave. But the boys instantly overtookhim and caught hold of him on all sides. Then he fell helpless on the snowas though he had been knocked down, and struggling, sobbing, and wailing,he began crying out, “Ilusha, old man, dear old man!” Alyosha and Kolyatried to make him get up, soothing and persuading him.
“Captain, give over, a brave man must show fortitude,” muttered Kolya.
“You’ll spoil the flowers,” said Alyosha, “and mamma is expecting them,she is sitting crying because you would not give her any before. Ilusha’slittle bed is still there—”
“Yes, yes, mamma!” Snegiryov suddenly recollected, “they’ll take away thebed, they’ll take it away,” he added as though alarmed that they reallywould. He jumped up and ran homewards again. But it was not far off andthey all arrived together. Snegiryov opened the door hurriedly and calledto his wife with whom he had so cruelly quarreled just before:
“Mamma, poor crippled darling, Ilusha has sent you these flowers,” hecried, holding out to her a little bunch of flowers that had been frozenand broken while he was struggling in the snow. But at that instant he sawin the corner, by the little bed, Ilusha’s little boots, which thelandlady had put tidily side by side. Seeing the old, patched, rusty‐looking, stiff boots he flung up his hands and rushed to them, fell on hisknees, snatched up one boot and, pressing his lips to it, began kissing itgreedily, crying, “Ilusha, old man, dear old man, where are your littlefeet?”
“Where have you taken him away? Where have you taken him?” the lunaticcried in a heartrending voice. Nina, too, broke into sobs. Kolya ran outof the room, the boys followed him. At last Alyosha too went out.
“Let them weep,” he said to Kolya, “it’s no use trying to comfort themjust now. Let us wait a minute and then go back.”
“No, it’s no use, it’s awful,” Kolya assented. “Do you know, Karamazov,”he dropped his voice so that no one could hear them, “I feel dreadfullysad, and if it were only possible to bring him back, I’d give anything inthe world to do it.”
“Ah, so would I,” said Alyosha.
“What do you think, Karamazov? Had we better come back here to‐night?He’ll be drunk, you know.”
“Perhaps he will. Let us come together, you and I, that will be enough, tospend an hour with them, with the mother and Nina. If we all come togetherwe shall remind them of everything again,” Alyosha suggested.
“The landlady is laying the table for them now—there’ll be a funeraldinner or something, the priest is coming; shall we go back to it,Karamazov?”
“Of course,” said Alyosha.
“It’s all so strange, Karamazov, such sorrow and then pancakes after it,it all seems so unnatural in our religion.”
“They are going to have salmon, too,” the boy who had discovered aboutTroy observed in a loud voice.
“I beg you most earnestly, Kartashov, not to interrupt again with youridiotic remarks, especially when one is not talking to you and doesn’tcare to know whether you exist or not!” Kolya snapped out irritably. Theboy flushed crimson but did not dare to reply.
Meantime they were strolling slowly along the path and suddenly Smurovexclaimed:
“There’s Ilusha’s stone, under which they wanted to bury him.”
They all stood still by the big stone. Alyosha looked and the wholepicture of what Snegiryov had described to him that day, how Ilusha,weeping and hugging his father, had cried, “Father, father, how heinsulted you,” rose at once before his imagination.
A sudden impulse seemed to come into his soul. With a serious and earnestexpression he looked from one to another of the bright, pleasant faces ofIlusha’s schoolfellows, and suddenly said to them:
“Boys, I should like to say one word to you, here at this place.”
The boys stood round him and at once bent attentive and expectant eyesupon him.
“Boys, we shall soon part. I shall be for some time with my two brothers,of whom one is going to Siberia and the other is lying at death’s door.But soon I shall leave this town, perhaps for a long time, so we shallpart. Let us make a compact here, at Ilusha’s stone, that we will neverforget Ilusha and one another. And whatever happens to us later in life,if we don’t meet for twenty years afterwards, let us always remember howwe buried the poor boy at whom we once threw stones, do you remember, bythe bridge? and afterwards we all grew so fond of him. He was a fine boy,a kind‐hearted, brave boy, he felt for his father’s honor and resented thecruel insult to him and stood up for him. And so in the first place, wewill remember him, boys, all our lives. And even if we are occupied withmost important things, if we attain to honor or fall into greatmisfortune—still let us remember how good it was once here, when we wereall together, united by a good and kind feeling which made us, for thetime we were loving that poor boy, better perhaps than we are. My littledoves—let me call you so, for you are very like them, those pretty bluebirds, at this minute as I look at your good dear faces. My dear children,perhaps you won’t understand what I am saying to you, because I oftenspeak very unintelligibly, but you’ll remember it all the same and willagree with my words some time. You must know that there is nothing higherand stronger and more wholesome and good for life in the future than somegood memory, especially a memory of childhood, of home. People talk to youa great deal about your education, but some good, sacred memory, preservedfrom childhood, is perhaps the best education. If a man carries many suchmemories with him into life, he is safe to the end of his days, and if onehas only one good memory left in one’s heart, even that may sometime bethe means of saving us. Perhaps we may even grow wicked later on, may beunable to refrain from a bad action, may laugh at men’s tears and at thosepeople who say as Kolya did just now, ‘I want to suffer for all men,’ andmay even jeer spitefully at such people. But however bad we maybecome—which God forbid—yet, when we recall how we buried Ilusha, how weloved him in his last days, and how we have been talking like friends alltogether, at this stone, the cruelest and most mocking of us—if we dobecome so—will not dare to laugh inwardly at having been kind and good atthis moment! What’s more, perhaps, that one memory may keep him from greatevil and he will reflect and say, ‘Yes, I was good and brave and honestthen!’ Let him laugh to himself, that’s no matter, a man often laughs atwhat’s good and kind. That’s only from thoughtlessness. But I assure you,boys, that as he laughs he will say at once in his heart, ‘No, I do wrongto laugh, for that’s not a thing to laugh at.’ ”
“That will be so, I understand you, Karamazov!” cried Kolya, with flashingeyes.
The boys were excited and they, too, wanted to say something, but theyrestrained themselves, looking with intentness and emotion at the speaker.
“I say this in case we become bad,” Alyosha went on, “but there’s noreason why we should become bad, is there, boys? Let us be, first andabove all, kind, then honest and then let us never forget each other! Isay that again. I give you my word for my part that I’ll never forget oneof you. Every face looking at me now I shall remember even for thirtyyears. Just now Kolya said to Kartashov that we did not care to knowwhether he exists or not. But I cannot forget that Kartashov exists andthat he is not blushing now as he did when he discovered the founders ofTroy, but is looking at me with his jolly, kind, dear little eyes. Boys,my dear boys, let us all be generous and brave like Ilusha, clever, braveand generous like Kolya (though he will be ever so much cleverer when heis grown up), and let us all be as modest, as clever and sweet asKartashov. But why am I talking about those two? You are all dear to me,boys, from this day forth, I have a place in my heart for you all, and Ibeg you to keep a place in your hearts for me! Well, and who has united usin this kind, good feeling which we shall remember and intend to rememberall our lives? Who, if not Ilusha, the good boy, the dear boy, precious tous for ever! Let us never forget him. May his memory live for ever in ourhearts from this time forth!”
“Yes, yes, for ever, for ever!” the boys cried in their ringing voices,with softened faces.
“Let us remember his face and his clothes and his poor little boots, hiscoffin and his unhappy, sinful father, and how boldly he stood up for himalone against the whole school.”
“We will remember, we will remember,” cried the boys. “He was brave, hewas good!”
“Ah, how I loved him!” exclaimed Kolya.
“Ah, children, ah, dear friends, don’t be afraid of life! How good life iswhen one does something good and just!”
“Yes, yes,” the boys repeated enthusiastically.
“Karamazov, we love you!” a voice, probably Kartashov’s, criedimpulsively.
“We love you, we love you!” they all caught it up. There were tears in theeyes of many of them.
“Hurrah for Karamazov!” Kolya shouted ecstatically.
“And may the dead boy’s memory live for ever!” Alyosha added again withfeeling.
“For ever!” the boys chimed in again.
“Karamazov,” cried Kolya, “can it be true what’s taught us in religion,that we shall all rise again from the dead and shall live and see eachother again, all, Ilusha too?”
“Certainly we shall all rise again, certainly we shall see each other andshall tell each other with joy and gladness all that has happened!”Alyosha answered, half laughing, half enthusiastic.
“Ah, how splendid it will be!” broke from Kolya.
“Well, now we will finish talking and go to his funeral dinner. Don’t beput out at our eating pancakes—it’s a very old custom and there’ssomething nice in that!” laughed Alyosha. “Well, let us go! And now we gohand in hand.”
“And always so, all our lives hand in hand! Hurrah for Karamazov!” Kolyacried once more rapturously, and once more the boys took up hisexclamation: “Hurrah for Karamazov!”
THE END